<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="border-collapse: collapse" bordercolor="#111111" width="607">
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Document number:</td>
        <td width="435"><span style="background-color: #FFFF00">P0319R1</span></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Date:</td>
        <td width="435">2017-06-15</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Project:</td>
        <td width="435">ISO/IEC JTC1 SC22 WG21 Programming Language C++</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Audience:</td>
        <td width="435">Library Evolution Working Group / Concurrency Working Group</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Reply-to:</td>
        <td width="435">Vicente J. Botet Escrib&aacute; &lt;<a href="mailto:vicente.botet@wanadoo.fr">vicente.botet@nokia.com</a>&gt;</td>
    </tr>
</table>

Adding Emplace functions for `promise<T>/future<T>` (revision 1)
===================================================

**Abstract**

This paper proposes the addition of emplace factories for `future<T>` and emplace functions for `promise<T>` as we have proposed for of `any` and `optional` in [P0032R2].

# Table of Contents

* [History](#history)
* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [Motivation](#motivation)
* [Proposal](#proposal)
* [Design rationale](#design-rationale)
* [Proposed wording](#proposed-wording)
* [Implementability](#implementability)
* [Open points](#open-points)
* [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)
* [References](#references)

# History

## Revision 1

Take in account the feedback from Kona:

* Clean up the proposal a bit. 
* Remove the `make_ready_future` overloads taking a `remove_reference_t<T>`. 
* Explain why there were integer template parameters.
* Remove noexcept from the `make_ready_future()` factory functions.
* Added a comparison table for `make_ready_future`.

In addition:

* Any references to `std::experimental::optional` have been replaced by `std::optional`.
 

# Introduction

This paper proposes the addition of emplace factories for `future<T>` and emplace functions for `promise<T>` as we have proposed for of `any` and `optional` in [P0032R2].

# Motivation

While we have added the `future<T>` factories `make_ready_future` and `make_exceptional_future` into [P0159R0], we don't have emplace factories as we have for `shared_ptr`and `unique_ptr` and we have for `any` and `optional`.  

The C++ standard should be coherent for features that behave the same way on different types and complete, that is, don't miss features that could make the user code more efficient. 

# Proposal

We propose to: 

* Add `promise<T>::emplace(Args...)` member function that emplaces the value instead of setting it.

* Add `future<T>` emplace factory `make_ready_future<T>(Args...)`.

## Emplace assignment for promises

Some times a promise setter function must construct the promise value type and possibly the exception, that is the value or the exceptions are not yet built.

Before

```c++
	void promiseSetter(std::promise<X>& p, bool cnd) {
	  if (cnd)
	    p.set_value(X(a, b, c));
	  else 
	    p.set_exception(std::make_exception_ptr(MyException(__FILE_, __LINE__)));
	}
```

Note that we need to repeat `X`.

With this proposal we can just emplace either the value or the exception.

```c++
	void producer(std::promise<int>& p, bool cnd) {
	  if (cnd) p.set_value(a, b, c);
	    p.set_exception(std::make_exception_ptr(MyException(__FILE_, __LINE__)));
	}
```

Note that not only the code can be more efficient, it is also clearer and more robust as we don't repeat neither `X`..

## Emplace factory for futures

Some `future` producer functions may know how to build the value at the point of construction and possibly the exception. However, when the value type is not available it must be constructed explicitly before making a ready future. The same applies for a possible exception that must be built.

Before

```c++
	future<X> futureProducer(bool cnd1, bool cnd2) {
	  if (cnd1) 
	    return make_ready_future(X(a, b, c));
	  if (cnd2) 
	    return make_exceptional_future<X>(MyException(__FILE_, __LINE__));
	  else 
	    return somethingElse();
	}
```

The same reasoning than the previous section applies here. With this proposal we can just write less code and have more (and possibly more efficient).

```c++
future<int> futureProducer(bool cnd1, bool cnd2) {
	  if (cnd1) 
	    return make_ready_future<X>(a, b, c);
	  if (cnd2) 
	    return make_exceptional_future<X>(MyException(__FILE_, __LINE__));
	  else 
	    return somethingElse();
	}
```
## Building a future<T&>

In order to deduce a reference we need to use `std::ref`

```c++
    int v=0;
    std::future<int&> x = std::experimental::make_ready_future(std::ref(v));
```
However we want also to be able to force the future value as a template parameter

```c++
    int v=0;
    std::future<int&> x = std::experimental::make_ready_future<int&>(v);
```

We believe this usage would appear in generic contexts and is for this reason desirable.

## Comparison with `make_ready_future` factories

In this table we use `mrf` instead ogf `make_ready_future`for layout concerns.

<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="border-collapse: collapse" bordercolor="#111111" width="607">
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> WITHOUT proposal </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> WITH proposal </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>
int v=0;
short s=0;
future&lt;void> x0  = mrf();

future&lt;int>  x1  = mrf(42);
future&lt;int>  x2  = mrf(v);
future&lt;int>  x3  = mrf(s); // ERROR

future&lt;int&> x4  = mrf(ref(v));

future&lt;int>  x5  = mrf&lt;void>(); // ERROR
future&lt;int>  x6  = mrf&lt;int>(42);
future&lt;int>  x7  = mrf&lt;int>(v);
future&lt;int>  x8  = mrf&lt;int>(s); // ERROR

future&lt;int&> x9  = mrf&lt;int&>(ref(v));
future&lt;int&> x10 = mrf&lt;int&>(v); // ERROR
future&lt;int&> x11 = mrf&lt;int&>(42); // ERROR

future&lt;A>    x12 = mrf&lt;A>(42, 42); // ERROR

        </b></td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>
int v=0;
short s=0;
future&lt;void> x0  = mrf();

future&lt;int>  x1  = mrf(42);
future&lt;int>  x2  = mrf(v);
future&lt;int>  x3  = mrf(s);

future&lt;int&> x4 = mrf(ref(v));

future&lt;int>  x5  = mrf&lt;void>();
future&lt;int>  x6  = mrf&lt;int>(42);
future&lt;int>  x7  = mrf&lt;int>(v);
future&lt;int>  x8  = mrf&lt;int>(s);

future&lt;int&> x9  = mrf&lt;int&>(ref(v));
future&lt;int&> x10 = mrf&lt;int&>(v);
future&lt;int&> x11 = mrf&lt;int&>(42); // ERROR

future&lt;A>    x12 = mrf&lt;A>(42, 42);


        </b></td>
    </tr>   

</table>

# Design rationale

## Why should we provide some kind of emplacement for `future`/`promise`?

Wrapping and type-erasure classes should all provide some kind of emplacement as it is more efficient to emplace than to construct the wrapped/type-erased type and then copy or assign it.

The current standard and the TS provide already a lot of such emplace operations, either in place  constructors, emplace factories, emplace assignments.

## Why emplace factories instead of in_place constructors?

`std::optional` provides in place constructors and emplace factory. 

This proposal just extends the current future factories to emplace factories.

Should we provide a future `in_place` constructor? For coherency purposes and in order to be generic, yes, we should. However we should also provide a constructor from a `T` which doesn't exists neither. This paper doesn't proposes this yet.

## Promise emplace assignments

`std::optional` provides emplace assignments via `optional::emplace()` and provides emplace factory.

We believe `promise<T>` should provide and similar interface. However, a promise accepts to be set only once, and so the function name should be different for the authors.

## `reference_wrapper<T>` overload to deduce `T&`

As it is the case for `make_pair` when the parameter is `reference_wrapper<T>`, the type deduced for the underlying type is `T&`.


## How to ensure that the parameter `T` is noy deduced?

If we had the following overload

```c++
  template <class T>
    future<experimental::meta::decay_unwrap_t<T>> make_ready_future(T&& x); // (1)
```
the following call will be accepted by (1) resulting in a `future<int>`, as the type is decayed.

```c++
    int v=0;
    std::future<int&> x = std::experimental::make_ready_future<int&>(v);
```

Adding at least a default int template parameter as follows

```c++
  template <int=0, ...int, class T>
    future<experimental::meta::decay_unwrap_t<T>> make_ready_future(T&& x); // (1)
  template <class T, class ...Args>
    future<T> make_ready_future(Args&&... args); // (2)
 
```

avoids the selection of overload (1) and selects (2).


# Impact on the standard

These changes are entirely based on library extensions and do not require any language features beyond what is available in C++ 14. 

# Proposed wording

The wording is relative to [P0159R0].

The current wording make use of `decay_unwrap_t` as proposed in [P0318R0], but if this is not accepted the wording can be changed without too much troubles.


## Thread library

**X.Y Header `<experimental/future>` synopsis**

*Replace the make_ready_future declaration in [header.future.synop] by*

```c++
namespace std {
namespace experimental {
inline namespace concurrency_v2 {

future<void> make_ready_future();
template <class T>
future<void> make_ready_future();
  
template <class T>
future<decay_unwrap_t<T>> make_ready_future(T&& x);
template <class T, class ...Args>
future<T> make_ready_future(Args&& ...args);
template <class T, class U, class ...Args>
future<T> make_ready_future(initializer_list<U> il, Args&& ...args);

}}
}
```

**X.Y Class template `promise`**

*Add  [futures.promise] the following in the synopsis*

```c++
template <class ...Args>
void promise::set_value(Args&& ...args);
template <class U, class... Args>
void promise::set_value(initializer_list<U> il, Args&&... args);

```

*Add the following*

###################################
```c++
template <class ...Args>
void promise::set_value(Args&& ...args);
```

*Requires*: `is_constructible<R, Args&&...>`

*Effects*: atomically initializes the stored value as if direct-non-list-initializing an object of type `R` with the arguments `forward<Args>(args)...)`in the shared state and makes that state ready.

*Postconditions*: this contains a value.

```[NDLR] Throws and Error conditions as before```

###################################
```c++
template <class U, class... Args>
void promise::set_value(initializer_list<U> il, Args&&... args);
```

*Requires*: `is_constructible<R, initializer_list<U>&, Args&&...>`

*Effects*: atomically initializes the stored value as if direct-non-list-initializing an object of type `R` with the arguments `il, forward<Args>(args)...)` in the shared state and makes that state ready.

*Postconditions*: this contains a value.

```[NDLR] Throws and Error conditions as before```

**Function template make_ready_future**

*Replace in [futures.make_ready_future] the following.*

###################################
```c++
future<void> make_ready_future();
template <class T>
future<void> make_ready_future();
```

*Effects*: The function creates a shared state immediately ready for `future<void>`. 

*Returns*: A future associated with that shared state. 

*Postconditions*: The returned future contains a value.

*Throws*: Any exception thrown by the construction.

*Remark*: The second overload shall not participate in overload resolution until `is_void_v<T>`.


###################################
```c++
template <class T>
future<decay_unwrap_t<T>> make_ready_future(T&& x);
```

*Effects*: The function creates a shared state immediately ready emplacing the `decay_unwrap_t<T>` with `forward<T>(x)`. 

*Returns*: A future associated with that shared state. 

*Postconditions*: The returned future contains a value.

*Throws*: Any exception thrown by the construction.

*Remark*: This function shall not participate in overload resolution until the template argument `T` is deduced.


###################################
```c++
template <class T, class ...Args>
future<T> make_ready_future(Args&& ...args);
template <class T, class U, class ...Args>
future<T> make_ready_future(initializer_list<U> il, Args&& ...args);
```

*Effects*: The function creates a shared state immediately ready emplacing the `T` with `T{args...}` for the first and with `T{il, args...}`. 

*Returns*: A future associated with that shared state. 

*Postconditions*: The returned future contains a value.

*Throws*: Any exception thrown by the construction.

*Remark*: These functions shall not participate in overload resolution until the `is_constructible_v<T, Args&&>` and `is_constructible_v<T, initializer_list<U> , Args&&>` respectively.
   
# Implementability

[Boost.Thread] contains an implementation of the emplace value functions. 
[make.impl] contains the implementation of the factories.

# Open Points

The authors would like to have an answer to the following points if there is at all an interest in this proposal. Most of them are bike-shedding about the name of the proposed functions:

## Do we want `make_ready_future` to use SFINAE?

The authors prefer to use SFINAE for `make_ready_future` so that we can check if the overload is allowed using SFINAE. This is useful in the context of [], where `make<TC>(args)`is defined using SFINAE. Otherwise we could add *Requires* clauses.

## `emplace_` versus `make_` factories

`shared_ptr` and `unique_ptr` factories `make_shared` and `make_unique` emplace already the underlying type and are prefixed by `make_`.   For coherency purposes the function emplacing future should use also `make_` prefix.


## `promise::emplace` versus `promise::set_value`

`promise<R>` has a `set_value` member function that accepts a

```c++ 
void promise::set_value(const R& r);
void promise::set_value(R&& r);
void promise<R&>::set_value(R& r);
void promise<void>::set_value();
```

There is no reason for constructing an additional `R` to set the value, we can emplace it

```c++
template <typename ...Args>
void promise::set_value(Args&& as);
```

`optional` names this member function `emplace`. However, a promise accepts to be set only once, and so the function name should be different. Should we add a new member `emplace` function to `promise<T>` or overload `set_value`?

## If `promise::set_value` is retained, do we want to add 'in_place_t'?

Aaryaman Sagar has proposed to add the 'in_place_t' parameter 

```c++

template <typename... Args>
void set_value(std::in_place_t, Args&&... args);

template <typename U, typename... Args>
void set_value(std::in_place_t, std::initializer_list<U> ilist, Args&&...)
```

Do we want to be so explicit?

# Future work

In addition to emplace value functions we could also have emplace exceptions functions. This would need to update also `exception_ptr` emplace factories. While this cases can perform better, the exceptional case need less optimizations.   

# Acknowledgements 

Thanks to Jonathan Wakely for his suggestion to limit the proposal to the emplace value cases which should be more consensual. 
Many thanks to Agustín K-ballo Bergé from which I learn the trick to implement the different overloads.
Many thanks to Patrice Roy for presenting the P0319R0. Thanks to Aaryaman Sagar for the `in_place_t' suggestion.

# References

[N4480]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4480.html "N4480- Working Draft, C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals"
[P0032R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0032r0.pdf "P0032 - Homogeneous interface for variant, any and optional" 

[P0032R2]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0032r2.pdf "P0032 - Homogeneous interface for variant, any and optional - Revision 1" 

[P0159R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0159r0.html "P0159 - Draft of Technical Specification for C++ Extensions for Concurrency"

[P0338R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0338r0.pdf "C++ generic factories" 

[P0318R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0318r0.pdf "`decay_unwrap` and `unwrap_reference`"

[make.impl]: https://github.com/viboes/std-make/blob/master/include/experimental/std_make_v1/make.hpp "C++ generic factory - Implementation" 

[Boost.Thread]: http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_60_0/doc/html/thread.html

       

* [N4480] N4480 - Working Draft, C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals
	http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4480.html 
 
* [P0032R0] P0032 - Homogeneous interface for variant, any and optional 

	http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0032r0.pdf

* [P0032R2] P0032 - Homogeneous interface for variant, any and optional - Revision 1

	http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0032r2.pdf

* [P0159R0] P0159 - Draft of Technical Specification for C++ Extensions for Concurrency

	http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0159r0.html 
	
* [P0318R0] `decay_unwrap` and `unwrap_reference`
 
	http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0318r0.pdf

* [P0338R0] - C++ generic factories

	http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0338r0.pdf

* [make.impl] C++ generic factory - Implementation 

	https://github.com/viboes/std-make/blob/master/include/experimental/std_make_v1/make.hpp

* [Boost.Thread] http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_60_0/doc/html/thread.html

