<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="border-collapse: collapse" bordercolor="#111111" width="607">
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Document number:</td>
        <td width="435"><span style="background-color: #FFFF00">D0032R2</span></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Date:</td>
        <td width="435">2015–11-05</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Project:</td>
        <td width="435">ISO/IEC JTC1 SC22 WG21 Programming Language C++</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Audience:</td>
        <td width="435">Library Evolution Working Group</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Reply-to:</td>
        <td width="435">Vicente J. Botet Escriba &lt;<a href="mailto:vicente.botet@wanadoo.fr">vicente.botet@wanadoo.fr</a>&gt;</td>
    </tr>
</table>

Homogeneous interface for `variant`, `any` and `optional` (Revision 2) 
=========================================================


This paper is the 2nd revision of [P0032R0] taking in account the feedback from Jacksonville meeting.
This paper identifies some differences in the design of `variant<Ts...>`, `any` and `optional<T>`, diagnoses them as owing to unnecessary asymmetry between those classes, and proposes wording to eliminate the asymmetry.# History


## Revision 2

The 2nd revision of [P0032R1] fixes some typos and takes in account the feedback from Jacksonville meeting. Next follows the direction of the committee:

* TBC
## Revision 1
The 1st revision of [P0032R0] takes in account the feedback from Kona meeting. Next follows the direction of the committee: globally keep the consensual part and extract the conflicting and less polished part.
* Do we want to adopt the new `in_place` definition?
 It is clear that we want a different name for the emplace function and the tag, however it is not clear the committee wants the `in_place` function reference. Nevertheless, the author dones't know how to have the `in_place` both for `optional`, `any` and `variant` without using function references, so this paper preserve this design.

```Leave optional different from variant and any     6
Member function is emplace; tag type is in_place  13
Both are emplace                                  6
```

* Do we want to adopt the new `in_place` definition?
 ```
SF F N A SA 
 1 3 8 0 0
```
   * Do we want in place constructor for `any`? Unanimous Yes.
 * Do we want the clear and reset changes? Yes
 How to empty an any or optional?

```
  .reset()                 12
  .clear()                  7
  =none (different paper)   7
  ={}                       5
  .drain()                  1

```
            * Do we want the operator bool changes? No, instead a `.something()` member function (e.g. `has_value`) is preferred for the 3 classes. This doesn't mean yet that we replace the existing explicit operator bool in `optional`.
 Do we want emptiness checking to be consistent between `any`/`optional`? Unanimous yes

```  Provide operator bool for both  Y:  6 N: 5
  Provide .something()            Y: 17 N: 0
  Provide =={}                    Y:  0 N: 5
  Provide ==std::none             Y:  5 N: 2
  something(any/optional)         Y:  3 N: 8
```

* Do we want the not-a-value `none`? No, too much unit types. The committee wants a separated paper for a generic `none_t`/`none`.
 * Do we want `none_t` to be a separate paper? 

```
SF F N A SA
11 1 3 0 0```
* Do we want the `make_any` factory? Yes
 ```
SF F N A SA
 1 9 7 2 0```
* Do we want to have a follow up for a concept based on the functions `holds` and`storage_address_of`? Not in this paper.* Do we want to have a follow up for `select<T>`/`select<I>`? Not in this paper.Considered as invention* Do we want to have a follow up for the observers `reference_of`, `value_of` and`address_of`? Not in this paper.

Other modifications
* Added a section in the design rationale describing the differences between the new and current`in_place`.
* Improved the wording and in particular added some missing overloads using`initializer_list`.* Added `constexpr` for `has_value`.* Added a comparative table on the appendix also.# Introduction
This paper identifies some differences in the design of `variant<Ts...>`, `any` and `optional<T>`, diagnoses them as owing to unnecessary asymmetry between those classes, and proposes wording to eliminate the asymmetry.
The identified issues are related to the last Fundamental TS proposal [N4480] and the variant proposal [N4542] and concerns mainly:
* coherency of functions that behave the same but that are named differently,* replace the `in_place` tag by a function with overloads for type and index,* replacement of `emplace_type<T>`/`emplace_index<I>` by `in_place<T>`/`in_place<I>`,* addition of emplace factories for `any` and `optional` classes.
 # Motivation and Scope
Both `optional` and `any` are classes that can store possibly some underlying type. In the case of `optional` the underlying type is know at compile time, for `any` the underlying type is any and know at run-time.
If the `variant` proposal ends by having nullable variant, the stored type would be any of the `Ts` or a not-a-value type, know at run-time. Let me refer to this possible variant of `nullable_variant <Ts...>`.The following inconsistencies have been identified:* `variant<Ts...>` and optional provides in place construction with different syntax while any requires a specific instance.
 * `variant<Ts...>` and `optional` provides emplace assignment while any requires a specific instance to be assigned.
 * The in place tags for `variant<Ts...>` and `optional` are different. However the name should be the same. `any` doesn't provides in place construction and assignment yet.
 * `any` provides `any::clear()` to unset the value while optional uses assignment from a `nullopt_t` or from `{}`. This paper doesn't contains any proposal to improve this situation. A separated paper would include a generic `none_t`/`none` proposal.
 * `optional` provides a explicit bool conversion while `any` provides an `any::empty` member function.
 * `optional<T>`, `variant<Ts...>` and any provides different interfaces to get the stored value. `optional` uses a value member function and pointer-like functions, `variant` uses a tuple like interface, while `any` uses a cast like interface. As all these classes are in someway classes that can possibly store a specific type, the first two limited and know at compile time, the last unlimited, it seems natural that all provide the same kind of interface. This paper doesn't contains any proposal to improve this situation. A separated paper would include a generic `none_t`/`none` proposal.
 The C++ standard should be coherent for features that behave the same way on different types. Instead of creating specific issues, we have preferred to write a specific paper so that we can discuss of the whole view.# Proposal
We propose to:
* Replace `in_place_t`/`in_place` by an overloaded function (see [eggs-variant]).* In class `optional<T>`	* Add a `reset` member function.	* Add a `has_value` member function.	* Add an additional overload for `make_optional` factory to emplace construct.* In class any	* make the default constructor `constexpr`,	* add `in_place` forward constructors,	* add `emplace` forward member functions,	* rename the `empty` function with `has_value` and make it constexpr,	* rename the `clear` member function to `reset`,	* Add a `make_any` factory to emplace construct.* In class variant<T>	* Replace the uses of `emplace_type_t<T>`/`emplace_index_t<I>` by `in_place_t<T>`/`in_place_t<I>`.	* Replace the uses of `emplace_type<T>`/`emplace_index<I>` by `in_place<T>`/`in_place<I>`.
 # Design rationale 


## `in_place` constructor`optional<T>` in place constructor constructs implicitly a `T`. 

```c++
	template <class... Args>	constexpr explicit optional<T>::optional(in_place_t, Args&&... args);
```
In place construct for `any` cannot have an implicit type `T`. We need a way to state explicitly which`T` must be constructed in place.

```c++      struct in_place_tag {};      template <class T>      using in_place_type_t = in_place_tag(&)(unspecified<T>);      template <class T>      in_place_tag in_place(unspecified<T>) { return {} };
```
The function `in_place_tag(&)(unspecified<T>)` is used to transport the type `T` participating in overload resolution.

```c++      template <class T, class ...Args>      any(in_place_type_t<T>), Args&& ...);
```      This can be used as

```c++      any(in_place<X>, v1, ..., vn);
```      Adopting this template class to `optional` would needs to change the definition of `in_place_t`/`in_place` to

```c++      using in_place_t = in_place_tag(&)(unspecified);      in_place_tag in_place(unspecified) { return {} };
```      The same applies to `variant`. We need an additional overload for `in_place`

```c++      template <int I>      using in_place_index_t = in_place_tag(&)(unspecified<I>);      template <int I>      in_place_tag in_place(unspecified<I>) { return {} };
```      Given

```c++struct Foo { Foo(int, double, char); };```Before:
```c++	   optional<Foo> of(in_place, 0, 1.5, 'c');      variant<int, Foo> vf(emplace_type<Foo>, 0, 1.5, 'c');      variant<int, Foo> vf(emplace_index<1>, 0, 1.5, 'c');      any af(Foo(0, 1.5, 'c')); // (*)```
After:```c++      optional<Foo> of(in_place, 0, 1.5, 'c');      variant<int, Foo> vf(in_place<Foo>, 0, 1.5, 'c');      variant<int, Foo> vf(in_place<1>, 0, 1.5, 'c');      any af(in_place<Foo>, 0, 1.5, 'c');
```Note that before any didn't support non-copyable-non-moveable objects like `std::mutex`. With `in_place` we are able to store a mutex in.
## Differences between the new `in_place_t` and the old one 


### Cost of function reference versus tagsThe prosed function reference for `in_place_t(&)(unspecified)` takes the size of an address while the previous `in_place_t` struct tag was empty and so its size is 1. We don't think this would reduce significantly the performances and believe that it can even perform better, however some measure would be done if there is an interest.
### Possible malicious attacks
Unfortunately using function references would work for any unary function taken the unspecified type and returning `in_place_tag` in addition to `in_place`. Of course defining such a function would imply to hack the unspecified type. This can be seen as a hole on this proposal, but the author think that it is better to have a uniform interface than protecting from malicious attacks from a hacker.
### No default constructible
While adapting `optional<T>` to the new `in_place_t` type we found that we cannot anymore use `in_place_t{}`. The authors don't consider this a big limitation as the user can use `in_place` instead.It needs to be noted that this is in line with the behavior of `nullopt_t` as `nullopt_t{}` fails as no default constructible. However `nullptr_t{}` seems to be well formed.### Not assignable from {}
After a deeper analysis we found also that the old `in_place_t` supported `in_place_t t = {};`The authors don't consider this a big limitation as we don't expect that a lot of users could use this and the user can use `in_place` instead.
```c++      in_place_t t = in_place;
```      It needs to be noted that this is in line with the behavior of `nullopt_t` as the following compile fails.```c++nullopt_t t = {}; // compile fails However nullptr_t seems to be support it.      nullptr_t t = {}; // compile pass````emplace` forward member function `optional<T>` emplace member function emplaces implicitly a `T`.

```c++      template <class ...Args>      optional<T>::emplace(Args&& ...);
```      `emplace` for `any` cannot have an implicit type `T`. We need a way to state explicitly which `T` must be emplaced.

```c++      template <class T, class ...Args>      any::emplace(Args&& ...);
```      and used as follows

```c++      any af;      optional<Foo> of;      variant<int, Foo> vf;      af.emplace<Foo>(v1, ..., vn);      of.emplace<Foo>(v1, ..., vn);      vf.emplace<Foo>(v1, ..., vn);
```c++      ## About empty()/explicit operator bool() member functions
`empty()` is more associated with containers. We don't see neither `any` nor `optional` as container classes. For probably valued types (as are the smart pointers and `optional`) the standard uses explicit `operator bool()` conversion instead. We consider `any` as a probably valued type.Given

```c++      struct Foo { Foo(int, double, char); };      unique_ptr<Foo> pf=...      optional<Foo> of=...;      any af=...;```
Before:
```c++      if (pf) ...      if (of) ...      if ( ! af.empty()) ...```
After:
```c++      if (pf) ...      if (of) ...      if (af) ...```
A lot of people consider that the `explicit operator bool()` conversion is not explicit enough. An alternative to `explicit operator bool()` is to use a member function `has_value` (or `holds`).
After:

```c++      if (pf.has_value()) ...      if (of.has_value()) ...      if (af.has_value()) ...```
The `has_value` member function is retained as more explicit and easy to read.As this proposal is not about any change in pointe-like classes we lost uniform syntax respect topointe-like classes. For `optional` we propose to have both. 

After:
```c++      if (pf) ...      if (of) ...      if (of.has_value()) ...      if (af.has_value()) ...```Having a uniform interface for pointe-like, type-erased and sum type classes should be the subject of another proposal. This is because there are other function for which the interfaces are not uniform.## About clear()/reset() member functions
`clear()` is more associated to containers. We don't see neither `any` nor `optional` as containerclasses. For probably valued types (as are the smart pointers) the standard uses `reset` instead. 

Given
```c++      struct Foo { Foo(int, double, char); };      unique_ptr<Foo> pf=...;      optional<Foo> of=...;      any af=...;```Before:
```c++      pf.reset();      of = nullopt;      af.clear();```After:```c++      pf.reset();      of.reset();      af.reset();```## About a not-a-value any: noneThe original proposal contained a `none_t`/`none` for `any`. It has been considered that we have too much unit types and that another paper should take care of a more generic none separately.

## Do we need an explicit make_any factory?
`any` is not a generic type but a type-erased type. `any` play the same role as a possible `make_any`.This paper however propose a `make_any` factory for the emplace case, see below.Note also that if [N4471] is adopted we wouldn't need any more `make_optional`, as e.g.`optional(1)` would be deduced as `optional<int>`.## About emplace factories
However, we could consider a `make_xxx` factory that in place constructs a `T`. `optional<T>` and `any` could be in place constructed as follows:
```c++      optional<T> opt(in_place, v1, vn);      f(optional<T>(in_place, v1, vn));      any a(in_place<T>, v1, vn);      f(any(in_place<T>, v1, vn));
```      When we use auto things change a little bit
```c++      auto opt = optional<T>(in_place, v1, vn);      auto a = any(in_place<T>, v1, vn);
```      This is almost uniform. However having an `make_xxx` factory function would make the code even more uniform
```c++      auto opt = make_optional<T>(v1, vn);      f(make_optional<T>(v1, vn));      auto a = make_any<T>(v1, vn);      f(make_any<T>(v1, vn));
```      The implementation of these emplace factories could as simple as:

```c++      template <class T, class ...Args>      optional<T> make_optional(Args&& ...args) {            return optional(in_place, std::forward<Args>(args)...);      }      template <class T, class ...Args>      any make_any(Args&& ...args) {            return any(in_place<T>, std::forward<Args>(args)...);      }
```      Given
```c++
      struct Foo { Foo(int, double, char); };```Before:
```c++      auto up = make_unique<Foo>(v1, ..., vn)      auto sp = make_shared<Foo>(v1, ..., vn)      auto o = optional<Foo>(in_place, v1, ..., vn)```After:```c++      auto a = any(Foo{v1, ..., vn})      auto up = make_unique<Foo>(v1, ..., vn)      auto sp = make_shared<Foo>(v1, ..., vn)      auto o = make_optional<Foo>(v1, ..., vn)      auto a = make_any<Foo>(v1, ..., vn)```## Which file for `in_place_t` and `in_place`?As `in_place_t` and `in_place` are used by `optional` and `any` we need to move its definition to another file. The preference of the authors will be to place them in `<experimental/utility>`.
Note that `in_place` could also be used by `std::experimental::variant` and that in this case it could also take an index as template parameter.
## Access interface
The original paper suggested a possible interface for sum types access. As the subject is quite contentious, another paper could take care of it separately.# Open points
The authors would like to have an answer to the following points if there is yet at all an interest in this proposal:* Are the differences in behavior of the new `in_place_t` acceptable?* Where to place `in_place_t`/`in_place`? `<experimental/utility>`?* Do we prefer `has_value`/`holds`?# Proposed wordingThe wording is relative to [N4480].## General utilities library
Add in [utility/synop]

```c++  struct in_place_tag {};    using in_place_t = in_place_tag(&)(unspecified);  template <class T>    using in_place_type_t = in_place_tag(&)(unspecified<T>);  template <int N>    using in_place_index_t = in_place_tag(&)(unspecified<N>);  constexpr in_place_t in_place(unspecified);  template <class ...T>;    constexpr in_place_t in_place(unspecified<T...>);  template <size N>;  constexpr in_place_t in_place(unspecified<N>);
```## Optional objects
Remove `in_place_t`/`in_place` from **[optional/synop]** and **[optional/inplace]** 

Update **[optional.synopsis]** adding after `make_optional`
```c++  template <class T, class ...Args>    optional<T> make_optional(Args&& ...args);  template <class T, class U, class ...Args>    optional<T> make_optional(initializer_list<U> il, Args&& ...args);
```    Add in **[optional.object]**
```c++  void reset() noexcept;
```  *Effects*: If `*this` contains a value, calls `val->T::~T()` to destroy the contained value;otherwise no effect. 

*Returns*: `*this`.
*Postconditions*: `*this` does not contain a value.

```c++  constexpr bool has_value() const noexcept; 
```

*Returns*: `true` if and only if `*this` contains a value. 

*Remarks*: This function shall be a `constexpr` function.Add in **[optional.specalg]**
```c++  template <class T, class ...Args>    optional<T> make_optional(Args&& ...args);
```    *Returns*: `optional<T>(in_place, std::forward(args)...)`. 

      template <class T, class U, class ...Args>      optional<T> make_optional(initializer_list<U> il, Args&& ...args); 
      
*Returns*: `optional<T>(in_place, il, std::forward(args)...)`.## Class `any`Update **[any.synopsis]** adding
```c++  template <class T, class ...Args>    any make_any(Args&& ...args);  template <class U, class T, class ...Args>    any make_any(initializer_list<U>, Args&& ...args);
```    Add `constexpr` on `any` default constructor 

```c++
constexpr any() noexcept;
```
Add inside class `any` 

```c++  // Constructors  template <class T, class ...Args>    any(in_place_type_t<T>, Args&& ...);  template <class T, class U, class... Args>    explicit any(in_place_type<T>, initializer_list<U>, Args&&...);  template <class T, class ...Args>    void emplace(Args&& ...);  template <class T, class U, class... Args>    void emplace(initializer_list<U>, Args&&...);
```    Replace inside class `any`

```c++
  void clear() noexcept;
  bool empty() const noexcept;
```  by
```c++  void reset() noexcept;  constexpr bool has_value() const noexcept;
```  and replace any use of `empty()` by `! has_value()` 

Add in **[any/cons]**
```c++  constexpr any() noexcept;  template <class T, class ...Args>    any(in_place_type_t<T>), Args&& ...);
```    *Requires*: `is_constructible_v<T, Args&&...>` is `true`.*Effects*: Initializes the contained value as if direct-non-list-initializing an object of type `T` with the arguments `std::forward<Args>(args)...`. 

*Postconditions*: this contains a value of type `T`.*Throws*: Any exception thrown by the selected constructor of `T`.
```c++  template <class T, class U, class ...Args>    any(in_place_type_t<T>, initializer_list<U> il, Args&& ...args);```*Requires*: `is_constructible_v<T, initializer_list<U>&, Args&&...>` is `true`. 

*Effects*: Initializes the contained value as if direct-non-list-initializing an object of type `T` with the arguments `il, std::forward<Args>(args)...`.*Postconditions*: `*this` contains a value.*Throws*: Any exception thrown by the selected constructor of `T`.*Remarks*: The function shall not participate in overload resolution unless `is_constructible_v<T, initializer_list<U>&, Args&&...>` is `true`.Add in **[any/modifiers]**
```c++    template <class T, class ...Args>    void emplace(Args&& ...);```*Requires*: `is_constructible_v<T, Args&&>` is `true`.*Effects*: Calls `this.reset()`. Then initializes the contained value as if direct-non-list-initializingan object of type `T` with the arguments `std::forward<Args>(args)...`.*Postconditions*: `*this` contains a value.*Throws*: Any exception thrown by the selected constructor of `T`.*Remarks*: If an exception is thrown during the call to `T`'s constructor, `*this` does not contain a value, and the previous (if any) has been destroyed.Add in **[any.assign]**
```c++    template <class T, class U, class ...Args>    void emplace(initializer_list<U> il, Args&& ...args);
```    *Requires*: `is_constructible<T, initializer_list<U>&, Args&&...>`*Effects*: Calls `this->reset()`. Then initializes the contained value as if direct-non-list-initializing an object of type `T` with the argument `sil, std::forward(args)...`.*Postconditions*: `*this` contains a value.*Throws*: Any exception thrown by the selected constructor of `T`.*Remarks*: If an exception is thrown during the call to `T`'s constructor, `*this` does not contain a value, and the previous (if any) has been destroyed.The function shall not participate in overload resolution unless `is_constructible_v<T, initializer_list<U>&, Args&&...>` is `true`.Replace in **[any/modifier]**, `clear` by `reset`.Replace in **[any/observers]**, `empty` by `has_value` (reversing the meaning).

```c++    constexpr bool has_value() const noexcept;```

*Returns*: `true` if `*this` contains an object, otherwise `false`. 

Add in **[any.nonmembers]**
```c++  template <class T, class ...Args>    any make_any(Args&& ...args);```

*Returns*: `any(in_place<T>, std::forward<Args>(args)...)`. 
```c++  template <class T, class U, class ...Args>    any make_any(initializer_list<U> il, Args&& ...args);```
*Returns*: `any(in_place<T>, il, std::forward<Args>(args)...)`.
# Acknowledgements
Thanks to Jeffrey Yasskin to encourage me to report these as possible issues of the TS.Many thanks to Agustin Bergé K-Balo for the function reference idea to represent `in_place` tags overloads and its valuable comments.Thanks to Tony Van Eerd for championing this proposal during the C++ standard committee meetings and helping me to improve globally the paper. The comparative table in the appendix comes from him.# References[N4480]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4480.html "N4480 - Working Draft, C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals"[N4542]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4542.pdf "N4542 - Variant: a type-safe union (v4)"[eggs-variant]: https://github.com/eggs-cpp/variant "eggs::variant"[N4471]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4471.html "N4471 - Template parameter deduction for constructors (Rev 2)"[P0032R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0032r0.pdf "Homogeneous interface for variant, any and optional"[P0032R1]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0032r1.pdf "Homogeneous interface for variant, any and optional"* [N4480] N4480 - Working Draft, C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals
	http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4480.html 
* [N4542] N4542 - Variant: a type-safe union (v4)
	http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4542.pdf 
* [eggs-variant] eggs::variant
	https://github.com/eggs-cpp/variant 
* [N4471] N4471 - Template parameter deduction for constructors (Rev 2)
	http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4471.html 
* [P0032R0] Homogeneous interface for variant, any and optional
	http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0032r0.pdf 
# Appendix<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="border-collapse: collapse" bordercolor="#111111" width="607">
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> WITHOUT proposal </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> WITH proposal </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td  align="left" valign="top"><b>
in_place, emplace_type, emplace_index
        </b></td><td/>
    </tr>   
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>
struct Foo { Foo(int, double); };
optional&lt;Foo> of(in_place, 0, 1.5); 
variant&lt;int, Foo> vf(emplace_type&lt;Foo>, 0, 1.5); 
variant&lt;int, Foo> vf(emplace_index&lt;1>, 0, 1.5); 
any af(Foo{0, 1.5, 'c'});
</pre>
NOTE: thus any currently does not support non move/copy-able
        </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'> 
struct Foo { Foo(int, double, char); };optional&lt;Foo> of(in_place, 0, 1.5); 
variant&lt;int, Foo> vf(in_place&lt;Foo>, 0, 1.5); 
variant&lt;int, Foo> vf(in_place&lt;1>, 0, 1.5); 
any af(in_place&lt;Foo>, 0, 1.5);</pre>Also, now any supports non move/copy-able
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td  align="left" valign="top"><b>
any.emplace()
        </b></td><td/>
    </tr>      
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>
of.emplace(0, 1.5, 'c'); 
vf.emplace&lt;Foo>(0, 1.5, 'c'); 
vf.emplace&lt;1>( 0, 1.5, 'c'); 
af = Foo{0, 1.5, 'c'};
		 </pre>any does not currently emplace        </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>
of.emplace(0, 1.5, 'c'); 
vf.emplace&lt;Foo>(0, 1.5, 'c'); 
vf.emplace&lt;1>( 0, 1.5, 'c'); 
af.emplace&lt;Foo>(0, 1.5, 'c');		 </pre>Now any supports non move/copy-able        </td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
        <td  align="left" valign="top"><b>
reset()        </b></td><td/>
    </tr>   
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>
unique_ptr&lt;Foo> uf = new Foo(0, 1.5, ‘c’);
uf.reset();of = nullopt;af.clear();		 </pre>        </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>
unique_ptr&lt;Foo> uf = new Foo(0, 1.5, ‘c’);

uf.reset();of.reset();af.reset();		 </pre>variant? No. Does not go empty. Could default-construct, but also doesn’t have has_value(). Don’t force false consistency.        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td  align="left" valign="top"><b>
has_value()        </b></td><td/>
    </tr>   
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>
if (uf) ...if (of) ...if ( ! af.empty()) ...		 </pre>        </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>
if (uf.has_value()) ...if (of has_value()) ...if (af.has_value()) ...		 </pre>NOTE: smart-ptrs as wellvariant? – No. intentionally “corrupted_by_exception”        </td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
        <td  align="left" valign="top"><b>
make_...() factories        </b></td><td/>
    </tr>   
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>
auto uf = make_unique&lt;Foo>(0, 1.5, ‘c’);auto sf = make_shared&lt;Foo>(0, 1.5, ‘c’);auto of = make_optional&lt;Foo>(Foo{0, 1.5, ‘c’}); 
auto af = any(Foo{0, 1.5, ‘c’});		 </pre>        </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>
auto uf = make_unique&lt;Foo>(0, 1.5, ‘c’); 
auto sf = make_shared&lt;Foo>(0, 1.5, ‘c’); 
auto of = make_optional&lt;Foo>(0, 1.5, ‘c’); 
auto af = make_any&lt;Foo>(0, 1.5, ‘c’);		 </pre>NOTE: EWG has mandated RVO so non move/copy-able also work        </td>
    </tr>

    <tr>
        <td  align="left" valign="top"><b>
constexpr any ctor        </b></td><td/>
    </tr>   
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>
any a;		 </pre>        </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>
any a; // (at namespace scope) constant initialization		 </pre>        </td>
    </tr>
    
</table>
    