<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="border-collapse: collapse" bordercolor="#111111" width="607">
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Document number:</td>
        <td width="435"><span style="background-color: #FFFF00">D0196R0</span></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Date:</td>
        <td width="435">2016-01-30</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Project:</td>
        <td width="435">ISO/IEC JTC1 SC22 WG21 Programming Language C++</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Audience:</td>
        <td width="435">Library Evolution Working Group</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Reply-to:</td>
        <td width="435">Vicente J. Botet Escriba &lt;<a href="mailto:vicente.botet@wanadoo.fr">vicente.botet@wanadoo.fr</a>&gt;</td>
    </tr>
</table>

# A generic `none_t` literal type for *Nullable* types
======================================================

**Abstract**

In the same way we have *NullablePointer* types with `nullptr` to mean a null
value, this proposal defines *Nullable* requirements for types for which `none`
means the null value.  This paper proposes a generic `none` literal for
*Nullable* types like `optional` and `any` and proposes to replace the variant
`monostate_t` defined in [P0088R0] by `none_t`.

Note that for *Nullable* types the null value doesn't mean an error, it is just
a value different from all the other values, it is none of the other values.

This takes in account the feedback from Kona meeting [P0032R0]. The direction of
the committee was:

* Do we want `none_t` to be a separate paper?

```
  SF F N A SA
  11 1 3 0 0
```

* Do we want the `operator bool` changes?
No, instead a `.something()` member function (e.g. `has_value`) is preferred for
the 3 classes. This doesn't mean yet that we replace the existing explicit
`operator bool` in `optional`.

* Do we want emptiness checking to be consistent between `any`/`optional`?
Unanimous yes

```
  Provide operator bool for both  Y:  6 N: 5
  Provide .something()            Y: 17 N: 0
  Provide =={}                    Y:  0 N: 5
  Provide ==std::none             Y:  5 N: 2
  something(any/optional)         Y:  3 N: 8
```

# Table of Contents

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Motivation and Scope](#motivation-and-scope)
3. [Proposal](#proposal)
4. [Design Rationale](#design-rationale)
5. [Proposed Wording](#proposed-wording)
6. [Implementability](#implementability)
7. [Open points](#open-points)
8. [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)
9. [References](#references)

# Introduction

There are currently two adopted single-value (unit) types, `nullptr_t` for
pointer-like classes and `nullopt_t` for `optional<T>`. [P0088R0] proposes an
additional `monostate_t` as yet another unit type. Most languages get by with
just one unit type. [P0032R0] proposed a new `none_t` and corresponding `none`
literal for the class `any`. The feedback from the Kona meeting was that should
not keep adding new “unit” types like this and that we need to have a generic
`none` literal at least for non pointer-like classes.

This paper presents a proposal for a generic `none_t` and `none` (no-value)
factory, creates the appropriate not-a-value for a given *Nullable* type.

Having a common syntax and semantics for this literal would help to have more
readable and teachable code, and potentially allows us to define generic
algorithms that need to create such a no-value instance.

Note however that we would not be able to define interesting algorithms without
having other functions around the *Nullable* concept as e.g. been able to create
a *Nullable* wrapping instance containing the associated value (the make factory
[MAKEF]) and observe whether this *Nullable* type contains a value or not
(e.g. a visitation type switch as proposed in [P0050], or the getter functions
proposed in [P0042], or Functor/Monadic operations).  This is left for a future
proposal.

# Motivation and Scope

## Why do we need a generic `none` literal

There is a proliferation of “unit” types that mean no-value type,

* `nullptr_t` for pointer-like objects and `std::function`,
* `std::experimental::nullopt_t` for `optional<T>`,
* `std::experimental::monostate` unit type for `variant<monostate_t, Ts...>` (in ([P0088R0]),
* `none_t` for `any` (in [P0032R0] - rejected as a specific unit type for any)

Having a common and uniform way to name these no-value types associated to
*Nullable* types would help to make the code more consistent, readable, and
teachable.

A single overarching `none` type could allow us to define generic algorithms
that operate across these generic *Nullable* types.

Generic code working with *Nullable* types, needs a generic way to name the null
value. This is the reason d'être of `none_t` and `none`.


## Possible ambiguity of a single no-value constant


Before going too, far let me show you the current situation with `nullptr` and to
my knowledge why `nullptr` was not retained as no-value constant for
`optional<T>` - opening the gates for additional unittypes.

### *NullablePointer* types

All the pointer-like types in the standard library are implicitly convertible
from and equality comparable to `nullptr_t`.

```c++
	int* ip = nullptr;
	unique_ptr<int> up = nullptr;
	shared_ptr<int> sp = nullptr;
    if (up == nullptr) ...
    if (ip == nullptr) ...
	if (sp == nullptr) ...
```

Up to now everything is ok. We have the needed context to avoid ambiguities.

However, if we have an overloaded function as e.g. print

```c++
	template <class T>
	void print(unique_ptr<T> ptr);
	template <class T>
	void print(shared_ptr<T> ptr);
```

The following call would be ambiguous

```c++
	print(nullptr);
```

Wait, who wants to print `nullptr`? Surely nobody. Anyway we could add an overload for `nullptr_t`

```c++
	void print(nullptr_t ptr);
```

and now the last overload will be preferred as there is no need to conversion.

If we want however to call to a specific overload we need to build the specific
pointer-like type, e.g if wanted the `shared_ptr<T>` overload, we will write

```c++
	print(shared_ptr<int>{});
```

Note that the last call contains more information than should be desired. The
`int` type is in some way redundant. It would be great if we could give as less
information as possible as in


```c++
	print(nullptr<shared_ptr>));
```

Clearly the type for `nullptr<shared_ptr>` couldn't be `nullptr_t`, nor a
specific `shared_ptr<T>`. So the type of `nullptr<shared_ptr>` should be
something different, let me call it e.g. `nullptr_t<shared_ptr>`

You can read `nullptr<shared_ptr>` as the null pointer value associated to
`shared_ptr`.

Note that even if template parameter deduction for constructors [P0091R0] is
adopted we are not able to write as the deduced type will not be the expected
one.

```c++
	print(shared_ptr(nullptr));
```

We are not proposing these for `nullptr` in this paper, it is just to present
the context. To the authors knowledge it has been accepted that the user needs to
be as explicit as needed.


```c++
	print(shared_ptr<int>{});
```

## Why `nullopt` was introduced?

Lets continue with `optional<T>`. Why didn't the committee want to reuse `nullptr` as the no-value for `optional<T>`?

	optional<int> oi = nullptr;
	oi = nullptr;

I believe that the two main concerns were that `optional<T>` is not a
pointer-like type even it it defines all the associated operations and that
having an `optional<int*>` the following would be ambiguous,

	optional<int*> sp = nullptr;


We need a different type that can be used either for all the *Nullable* types or
for those that are wrapping an instance of a type, not pointing to that
instance. At the time, as the problem at hand was to have an `optional<T>`, it
was considered that a specific solution will be satisfactory. So now we have

```c++
	template <class T>
	void print(optional<T> o);

	optional<int> o = nullopt;
	o = nullopt;
	print(nullopt);
```

## Moving to *Nullable* types

Some could think that it is better to be specific. But what would be wrong
having a single way to name this no-value for a specific class using `none`?

```c++
	optional<int> o = none;
	any a = none;
	o = none;
	a = none;
```

So long as the context is clear there is no ambiguity.

We could as well add the overload to `print` the no-value none

```c++
	void print(none_t);
```

and

```c++
	print(none);
	print(optional<int>{});
```


So now we can see `any` as a *Nullable* if we provide the conversions from `none_t`

```c++
	any a = none;
	a = none;
	print(any{});
```

## Nesting *Nullable* types

We don't provide a solution to the following use case. How to initialize an `optional<any>` with an `any`  none

```c++
optional<any> o = none; // assert(! o)
```

```c++
optional<any> o = any{};  // assert(o)
```

Note that `any` is already `Nullable`, so how will this case be different from

```c++
optional<optional<int>> = optional<int>{};
```

or from nested smart pointers.


## Other operations involving the unit type

There are other operations between the wrapping type and the unit type, such as the mixed equality comparison:

```c++
	o == nullopt;
	a == any{};
```

Type erased classes as `std::experimental::any` don't provide order comparison.

However *Nullable* types wrapping a type as `optional<T>` can provide mixed comparison if the type `T` is ordered.

```c++
	o > none
	o >= none
	! (o < none)
	! (o <= none)
```

So the question is whether we can define these mixed comparisons once for all on
a generic `none_t` type and a model of *Nullable*.

```c++
	template < Nullable C >
	bool operator==(none_t, C const& x) { return ! x.has_value(); }
	template < Nullable C >
	bool operator==(C const& x, none_t { return ! x.has_value(); }
	template < Nullable C >
	bool operator!=(none_t, C const& x) { return x.has_value(); }
	template < Nullable C >
	bool operator!=(C const& x, none_t) { return x.has_value(); }
```

The ordered comparison operations should be defined only if the *Nullable* class is Ordered.

## Differences between `nullopt_t` and `monostate_t`

`std::experimental::nullopt_t` is not *DefaultConstructible*, while `monostate_t` must be *DefaultConstructible*. 

`std::experimental::nullopt_t` was required not to be *DefaultConstructible* so that the following syntax is well formed for an optional object `o` 

```
o = {}
```


So we need that a `none_t` that is *DefaultConstructible* but that `{}` is not deduced to `nullopt_t{}`. This is possible if `nullopt_t` default constructor is explicit and [CWG 1518] is adopted.

The `std::experimental::none_t` is a user defined type that has a single value `std::experimental::none`. The explicit default construction of `none_t{}` is equal to `none`. We say `none_t` is a unit type.

Note that neither `nullopt_t`, `monostate_t` nor the proposed `none_t` behave like a tag type so that [LWG 2510] should not apply.

Waiting for [CWG 1518] the workaround could be to move the assignment of `optional<T>` from a `nullopt_t` to a template as it was done for `T`.

# Proposal

This paper proposes to

* add `none_t`/`none`,
* add requirements for *Nullable* and *StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable* types, and derive the mixed comparison operations on them,
* add some minor changes to `optional`, `any` and `variant` to take `none_t` as its no-value type.


# Proposed Wording
The proposed changes are expressed as edits to [N4564] the Working Draft - C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals V2.

**Add a "Nullable Objects" section**

## Nullable Objects

### No-value state indicator

The `std::experimental::none_t` is a user defined type that has a single value `std::experimental::none`. The explicit default construction of `none_t{}` is equal to `none`. `std::experimental::none_t`  shall be a literal type. We say `none_t` is a unit type. 


[Note: `std::experimental::none_t` is a distinct unit type to indicate the state of not containing a value for *Nullable* objects. The single value of this type `none` is a constant that can be converted to any *Nullable* type and that must equally compare to a default constructed *Nullable*. —- endnote]

### *Nullable* requirements

A *Nullable* type is a type that supports a distinctive null value. A type `N` meets the requirements of *Nullable* if:

* `N` satisfies the requirements of *DefaultConstructible*, and *Destructible*,
* the expressions shown in the table below are valid and have the indicated semantics, and
* N satisfies all the other requirements of this sub-clause.

A value-initialized object of type `N` produces the null value of the type. The null value shall be equivalent only to itself. A default-initialized object of type `N` may have an indeterminate value. [ Note: Operations involving indeterminate values may cause undefined behavior. — end note ]

No operation which is part of the *Nullable* requirements shall exit via an exception.
In Table below, `u` denotes an identifier, `t` denotes a non-const lvalue of type `N`, `x` denotes a (possibly const) expression of type `N`,
and `n` denotes a value of type (possibly const) `std::experimental::none_t`.

<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="border-collapse: collapse" bordercolor="#111111" width="607">
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> Expression </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> Return Type </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> Operational Semantics </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> N u(n) </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> post: u == N{} </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> N u = n </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> post: u == N{} </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> t = n </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> N&</td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> post: t == N{} </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> x.has_value() </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> contextualy convertible to bool</td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> x != N{} </td>
    </tr>

</table>

Mixed equality comparison between a *Nullable* and a `none_t` are defined as

```c++
	template < Nullable C >
	bool operator==(none_t, C const& x) { return ! x.has_value(); }
	template < Nullable C >
	bool operator==(C const& x, none_t { return ! x.has_value(); }
	template < Nullable C >
	bool operator!=(none_t, C const& x) { return x.has_value(); }
	template < Nullable C >
	bool operator!=(C const& x, none_t) { return x.has_value(); }

```


### *StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable* requirements

A type `N` meets the requirements of *StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable* if:

* `N` satisfies the requirements of *StrictWeaklyOrdered* and *Nullable*.


Mixed ordered comparison between a *StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable* and a `none_t` are defined as

```c++
	template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	bool operator<(none_t, C const& x) { return x.has_value(); }
	template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	bool operator<(C const& x, none_t { return false; }

	template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	bool operator<=(none_t, C const& x) { return true; }
	template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	bool operator<=(C const& x, none_t { return ! x.has_value(); }

	template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	bool operator>(none_t, C const& x) { return false; }
	template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	bool operator>(C const& x, none_t { return x.has_value(); }

	template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	bool operator>=(none_t, C const& x) { return ! x.has_value(); }
	template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	bool operator>=(C const& x, none_t { return true; }
```



### Header <experimental/nullable> synopsis [nullable.synop]

```c++
namespace std {
  namespace experimental {
  inline namespace fundamentals_v3 {

    struct none_t{
        explicit none_t() {}
    };
    constexpr bool operator==(none_t, none_t) { return true; }
    constexpr bool operator!=(none_t, none_t) { return false; }
    constexpr bool operator<(none_t, none_t) { return false; }
    constexpr bool operator<=(none_t, none_t) { return true; }
    constexpr bool operator>(none_t, none_t) { return false; }
    constexpr bool operator>=(none_t, none_t) { return true; }
    
    constexpr none_t none = none_t{}; 

    // Comparison with none_t
    template < Nullable C >
      bool operator==(none_t, C const& x) noexcept { return ! x.has_value(); }
    template < Nullable C >
      bool operator==(C const& x, none_t) noexcept { return ! x.has_value(); }
    template < Nullable C >
      bool operator!=(none_t, C const& x) noexcept { return x.has_value(); }
    template < Nullable C >
	   bool operator!=(C const& x, none_t) noexcept { return x.has_value(); }

    template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	   bool operator<(none_t, C const& x) { return x.has_value(); }
    template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	   bool operator<(C const& x, none_t { return false; }
	template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	   bool operator<=(none_t, C const& x) { return true; }
    template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	   bool operator<=(C const& x, none_t { return ! x.has_value(); }
    template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	   bool operator>(none_t, C const& x) { return false; }
    template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	   bool operator>(C const& x, none_t { return x.has_value(); }
    template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	   bool operator>=(none_t, C const& x) { return ! x.has_value(); }
    template < StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable C >
	   bool operator>=(C const& x, none_t { return true; }
  }
  }
}
```


## Optional Objects

**Add** `optional<T>` is a model of *Nullable*.

**Add** `optional<T>` is a model of *StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable* if `T` is a model of *StrictWeaklyOrdered*.

**Remove** the definition of `nullopt_t`/`nullopt`.

**Replace** any use of `nullopt_t`/`nullopt` by `none_t`/`none`.

**Remove** the mixed operations as redundant [optional.nullops].

## Class Any

**Add** `any` is a model of *Nullable*.

**Add** a constructor from `none_t` equivalent to the default constructor.

**Add** a assignment from `none_t` equivalent assigning a default constructed object.

## Variant Objects

Waiting for a specific wording for `variant` in a TS.

**Remove** the definition of `monostate_t`.

**Replace** any additional use of `monostate_t` by `none_t`.


# Implementability

This proposal can be implemented as pure library extension, without any language support, in C++14.
However the adoption of [CWG 1518] will make it simpler.

# Open points

The authors would like to have an answer to the following points if there is any interest at all in this proposal:

* Should we include `none` in `<experimental/functional>` or in a specific file?
	* We believe that a specific file is a better choice as this is needed in `<experimental/optional>`, `<experimental/any>` and `<experimental/variant>`. I propose `<experimental/none>`.

* Should the mixed comparison with `none_t` be defined implicitly?

    * An alternative is to don't define them. In this case it could be better to remove the *Nullable* and *StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable* requirements as the "reason d'être" of those requirements is to define these operations.

* Should *Nullable* require in addition the expression `n = {}` to mean reset?

* Should `variant<none_t, Ts ...>` be considered as *Nullable*?

    * This will need the addition of `v.has_value()`.

* Bike-shading - *Nullable* versus *NullableValue*

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Tony Van Eerd and Titus Winters for helping me to improve globally the paper. Thanks to Agustín Bergé K-ballo for his useful comments. Thanks to Ville Voutilainen for the pointers about explicit default construction.

# References

[N4564]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4564.pdf "N4564 - Working Draft, C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals, Version 2 PDTS"

[P0032R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0032r0.pdf "Homogeneous interface for variant, any and optional"

[P0088R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0088r0.pdf "Variant: a type-safe union that is rarely invalid (v5)"  

[P0091R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0091r0.html "Template parameter deduction for constructors (Rev. 3)"

[MAKEF]: https://github.com/viboes/std-make/blob/master/doc/proposal/factories/DXXXX_factories.md "C++ generic factories"

[LWG 2510]: http://cplusplus.github.io/LWG/lwg-active.html#2510 "Tag types should not be DefaultConstructible"
        
[CWG 1518]: http://open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/cwg_active.html#1518 "Explicit default constructors and copy-list-initialization" 
    

* [N4564] N4564 - Working Draft, C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals, Version 2 PDTS

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4564.pdf

* [P0032R0] Homogeneous interface for variant, any and optional

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0032r0.pdf

* [P0091R0] Template parameter deduction for constructors (Rev. 3)

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0091r0.html

* [P0088R0] Variant: a type-safe union that is rarely invalid (v5)

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0088r0.pdf

* [MAKEF] C++ generic factories

    https://github.com/viboes/std-make/blob/master/doc/proposal/factories/DXXXX_factories.md

* [LWG 2510] Tag types should not be DefaultConstructible

    http://cplusplus.github.io/LWG/lwg-active.html#2510
    
* [CWG 1518] Explicit default constructors and copy-list-initialization 

    http://open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/cwg_active.html#1518

# Appendix

## Lifting `none`

Not proposed by this paper, there is a possibility to lift `none`. This lifted
value would express explicitly that the wrapped value would be used to emplace
the optional wrapped valued.

```c++
optional<any> o = lift(none);
```

The result of lift would be a type that will wrap `none_t`. `optional<T>` will
need to accept a conversion from this `lifted<U>` by emplacing the type `T` from
the type `U`.

## Dependent `no_value<T>`

A different on going proposal [MAKEF] C++ generic factories would propose a 
`no_value` function so that we could do

```c++
optional<any> o = no_value<any>();
```

```c++
shared_ptr<unique_ptr<int>> o = no_value<unique_ptr>();
```

