<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="border-collapse: collapse" bordercolor="#111111" width="607">
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Document number:</td>
        <td width="435"><span style="background-color: #FFFF00">D0196R5</span></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Date:</td>
        <td width="435">2018-04-07</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Project:</td>
        <td width="435">ISO/IEC JTC1 SC22 WG21 Programming Language C++</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Audience:</td>
        <td width="435">Library Evolution Working Group</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Reply-to:</td>
        <td width="435">Vicente J. Botet Escrib&aacute; &lt;<a href="mailto:vicente.botet@wanadoo.fr">vicente.botet@nokia.com</a>&gt;</td>
    </tr>
</table>

# Generic `none()` factories for *Nullable* types
=================================================

**Abstract**

In the same way we have *NullablePointer* types with `nullptr` to mean a null
value, this proposal defines *Nullable* requirements for types for which `none()`
means the null value.  This paper proposes some generic `none()` factories for
*Nullable* types like `optional`, pointers and smart pointers.

Note that for *Nullable* types the null value doesn't mean an error, it is just
a value different from all the other values, it is none of the other values.


# Table of Contents

[Introduction](#introduction)
[Motivation and Scope](#motivation-and-scope)
[Proposal](#proposal)
[Design Rationale](#design-rationale)
[Proposed Wording](#proposed-wording)
[Implementability](#implementability)
[Open points](#open-points)
[Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)
[History](#history)
[References](#references)

# Introduction

There are currently two adopted single-value (unit) types, `nullptr_t` for
pointer-like classes and `nullopt_t` for `optional<T>`. [P0088R0] proposes an
additional `monostate_t` as yet another unit type. Most languages get by with
just one unit type. [P0032R0] proposed a new `none_t` and corresponding `none`
literal for the class `any`. The feedback from the Kona meeting was that should
not keep adding new “unit” types like this and that we need to have a generic
`none` literal at least for non pointer-like classes.

Revision 0 for this paper presented a proposal for a generic `none_t` and `none` (no-value)
factory, creates the appropriate not-a-value for a given *Nullable* type.

Revision 1 presented two kind of `none` factories  `none()` and `none<T>()`.

Revision 2 makes it possible to consider pointer-like types a *Nullable*.

Revision 3 adds a new `nullable::deref` customization point and a lot of algorithms that can be built on top of *Nullable* thanks to this addition, as *Functor* `transform`, *ApplicativeFunctor* `ap`, *Monad* `bind`,  *SumType* `visit`, and some minor algorithms `value_or`and `apply_or`. 

Revision 4 rollbacks the *Nullables* cannot provide always a `deref`. We have  moved `deref` to another concept hierarchy [P0786R0]. We will need to refactor this proposal in accordance to [P0786R0].

Having a common syntax and semantics for this factories would help to have more
readable and teachable code, and potentially allows us to define generic 
algorithms that need to create such a no-value instance.

Note however that we would not be able to define interesting algorithms without
having other functions around the *Nullable* concept as e.g. being able to create
a *Nullable* wrapping instance containing the associated value (the make factory
[P0338R2]) and observe the value or the not-a-value a *Nullable* type contains, or visitation type switch as proposed in [P0050R0], or the getter functions
proposed in [P0042], or Functor/Monadic operations.  This is left for future
proposals.

<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="border-collapse: collapse" bordercolor="#111111" width="807">
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> BEFORE </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> AFTER </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td  align="left" valign="top"><b>
Construction
        </b></td>
        <td  align="left" valign="top"><b>
        </b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>

int* p        = nullptr;
unique_ptr&lt;int> sp = nullptr;
shared_ptr&lt;int> sp = nullptr;
optional&lt;int> o    = nullopt;



//unique_ptr&lt;int> sp = unique_ptr{};
//shared_ptr&lt;int> sp = shared_ptr{};
//optional&lt;int> o    = optional{};
any a         = any{};
        </pre>
        </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'> 
int* p        = none();
unique_ptr&lt;int> sp = none();
shared_ptr&lt;int> sp = none();
optional&lt;int> o    = none();
any a         = none();

//int* p        = none&lt;add_pointer>();
shared_ptr&lt;int> sp = none&lt;shared_ptr>();
shared_ptr&lt;int> sp = none&lt;unique_ptr>();
optional&lt;int> o    = none&lt;optional>();
any a         = none&lt;any>();
        </pre>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td  align="left" valign="top"><b>
Conversion

        </b></td>
        <td  align="left" valign="top"><b>
        </b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>

void g(int*);
void f(unique_ptr&lt;int>);
void f(optional&lt;int>);
void f(any);

g(nullptr);
f(nullptr);
f(nullopt);

//f(unique_ptr{});
//f(optional{});
f(any{});
        </pre>
        </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'> 
void g(int*);
void f(unique_ptr&lt;int>);
void f(optional&lt;int>);
void f(any);




//g(none&lt;add_pointer>());
f(none&lt;unique_ptr>());
f(none&lt;optional>());
f(none&lt;any>());
        </pre>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td  align="left" valign="top"><b>
Return
        </b></td>
        <td  align="left" valign="top"><b>
        </b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'>

template &lt;template &lt;class ...> class TC, class T>
TC&lt;T> f(T) {
    return TC&lt;T>{};
}

f&lt;add_pointer_t>(a)
f&lt;optional>(a)
f&lt;unique_ptr>(a)
f&lt;shared_ptr>(a)









        </pre>
        </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"><pre class='brush: cpp'> 
template &lt;template &lt;class ...> class TC, class T>
invoke_t&lt;quote&lt;TC>,T> f(T) {
    return none&lt;TC>();
}

//f&lt;add_pointer>(a)
f&lt;optional>(a)
f&lt;unique_ptr>(a)
f&lt;shared_ptr>(a)

template &lt;class TC, class T>
invoke_t&lt;TC,T> f(T) {
    return none&lt;TC>();
}

f&lt;add_pointer&lt;_t>>(a)
f&lt;optional&lt;_t>>(a)
f&lt;unique_ptr&lt;_t>>(a)
f&lt;shared_ptr&lt;_t>>(a)
f&lt;any>(a)
        </pre>
        </td>
    </tr>
    
       
</table>

# Motivation and Scope

## Why do we need a generic `none()` literal factory

There is a proliferation of “unit” types that mean no-value type,

* `nullptr_t` for pointer-like objects and `std::function`,
* `std::nullopt_t` for `optional<T>`,
* `std::monostate` unit type for `std::variant<std::monostate_t, Ts...>` (in ([P0088R0]),
* `none_t` for `any` (in [P0032R0] - rejected as a specific unit type for `any`)

Having a common and uniform way to name these no-value types associated to
*Nullable* types would help to make the code more consistent, readable, and
teachable.

A single overarching `none_t` type could allow us to define generic algorithms
that operate across these generic *Nullable* types.

Generic code working with *Nullable* types, needs a generic way to name the null
value associated to a specific *Nullable* type `N`. This is the reason d'être of  `none<N>()`.

## Possible ambiguity of a single no-value constant

Before going too far, let me show you the current situation with `nullptr` and to
my knowledge why `nullptr` was not retained as no-value constant for
`optional<T>` - opening the gates for additional unit types.

### *NullablePointer* types

All the pointer-like types in the standard library are implicitly convertible
from and equality comparable to `nullptr_t`.

```c++
	int* ip = nullptr;
	unique_ptr<int> up = nullptr;
	shared_ptr<int> sp = nullptr;
    if (up == nullptr) ...
    if (ip == nullptr) ...
	if (sp == nullptr) ...
```

Up to now everything is ok. We have the needed context to avoid ambiguities.

However, if we have an overloaded function as e.g. `print`

```c++
	template <class T>
	void print(unique_ptr<T> ptr);
	template <class T>
	void print(shared_ptr<T> ptr);
```

The following call would be ambiguous

```c++
	print(nullptr);
```

Wait, who wants to print `nullptr`? Surely nobody wants. Anyway we could add an overload for `nullptr_t`

```c++
	void print(nullptr_t ptr);
```

and now the last overload will be preferred as there is no need to conversion.

If we want however to call to a specific overload we need to build the specific
pointer-like type, e.g if wanted the `shared_ptr<T>` overload, we will write

```c++
	print(shared_ptr<int>{});
```

Note that the last call contains more information than should be desired. The
`int` type is in some way redundant. It would be great if we could give as less
information as possible as in


```c++
	print(nullptr<shared_ptr>));
```

Clearly the type for `nullptr<shared_ptr>` couldn't be `nullptr_t`, nor a
specific `shared_ptr<T>`. So the type of `nullptr<shared_ptr>` should be
something different, let me call it e.g. `nullptr_t<shared_ptr>`

You can read `nullptr<shared_ptr>` as the null pointer value associated to
`shared_ptr`.

Note that even if template parameter deduction for constructors [P0091R0] is
adopted we are not able to write the following, as the deduced type will not be the expected one.

```c++
	print(shared_ptr(nullptr));
```

We are not proposing these for `nullptr` in this paper, it is just to present
the context. To the authors knowledge it has been accepted that the user needs to
be as explicit as needed.


```c++
	print(shared_ptr<int>{});
```

## Why `nullopt` was introduced?

Lets continue with `optional<T>`. Why the committee didn't wanted to reuse `nullptr` as the no-value for `optional<T>`?

	optional<int> oi = nullptr;
	oi = nullptr;

I believe that the two main concerns were that `optional<T>` is not a
pointer-like type even if it defines all the associated operations and that
having an `optional<int*>`, the following would be ambiguous

	optional<int*> sp = nullptr;


We need a different type that can be used either for all the *Nullable* types or
for those that are wrapping an instance of a type, not pointing to that
instance. At the time, as the problem at hand was to have an `optional<T>`, it
was considered that a specific solution will be satisfactory. So now we have

```c++
	template <class T>
	void print(optional<T> o);

	optional<int> o = nullopt;
	o = nullopt;
	print(nullopt);
```

## Moving to *Nullable* types

Some could think that it is better to be specific. But what would be wrong
having a single way to name this no-value for a specific class using `none`?

```c++
	optional<int> o = none();
	any a = none();
	o = none();
	a = none();
```

So long as the context is clear there is no ambiguity.

We could as well add the overload to `print` the no-value none

```c++
	void print(none_t);
```

and

```c++
	print(none());
	print(optional<int>{});
```


So now we can see `any` as a *Nullable* if we provide the conversions from `none_t`

```c++
	any a = none();
	a = none();
	print(any{});
```

## Nesting *Nullable* types

We don't provide a solution to the following use case. How to initialize an `optional<any>` with an `std::any` `none()`

```c++
optional<any> oa2 = any{};  // assert(o)
optional<any> oa1 = none(); // assert(! o)
```

If we want that

```c++
optional<any> oa1 = none<any>(); // assert(o)
```

the resulting type for `none<any>()` shouldn't `none_t` and we will need a `nullany_t`. This paper don't includes yet this `nullany_t`, but the author considers that this is the best direction. Have a common `none_t` that can be used when there is no ambiguity and `none<T>` to disambiguate.
 
Note that `any` is already `Nullable`, so how will this case be different from

```c++
optional<optional<int>> oo1 = optional<int>{};
optional<optional<int>> oo2 = nullopt;
```

or from nested smart pointers.

```c++
shared_ptr<unique_ptr<int>> sp1 = unique_ptr<int>{};
shared_ptr<unique_ptr<int>> sp2 = nullptr;
```

However we propose a solution when the result type of not-a-value of the two *Nullables* is a different type.

```c++
optional<unique_ptr<int>> oup1 = none(); // assert(! o)
optional<unique_ptr<int>> oup1 = nullptr; // assert(o)

optional<unique_ptr<int>> oup1 = none<optional>; // assert(! o)
optional<unique_ptr<int>> oup1 = none<unique_ptr>; // assert(o)
```

The result type of `none<Tmpl>()` depends on the `Tmpl` parameter.


## Other operations involving the unit type

There are other operations between the wrapping type and the unit type, such as the mixed equality comparison:

```c++
	o == nullopt;
	a == any{};
```

Type erased classes as `std::any` don't provide comparison.

However *Nullable* types wrapping a type as `optional<T>` can provide mixed comparison if the type `T` is ordered.

```c++
	o > none()
	o >= none()
	! (o < none())
	! (o <= none())
```

So the question is whether we can define these mixed comparisons once for all on
a generic `none_t` type and a model of *Nullable*.

```c++
	template < Nullable C >
	bool operator==(none_t, C const& x) { return ! std::has_value(x); }
	template < Nullable C >
	bool operator==(C const& x, none_t { return ! std::has_value(x); }
	template < Nullable C >
	bool operator!=(none_t, C const& x) { return std::has_value(x); }
	template < Nullable C >
	bool operator!=(C const& x, none_t) { return std::has_value(x); }
```

The ordered comparison operations should be defined only if the *Nullable* class is *Ordered*.

## Differences between `nullopt_t` and `monostate_t`

`std::nullopt_t` is not *DefaultConstructible*, while `monostate_t` must be *DefaultConstructible*. 

`std::nullopt_t` was required not to be *DefaultConstructible* so that the following syntax is well formed for an optional object `o` 

```
o = {}
```

So we need a `none_t` that is *DefaultConstructible* but that `{}` is not deduced to `nullopt_t{}`. This is possible if `nullopt_t` default constructor is explicit (See  [LWG 2510], [CWG 1518] and [CWG 1630]).

The `std::experimental::none_t` is a user defined type that has a single value `std::experimental::none()`. The explicit default construction of `none_t{}` is equal to `none()`. We say `none_t` is a unit type.

Note that neither `nullopt_t`, `monostate_t` nor the proposed `none_t` behave like a tag type so that [LWG 2510] should not apply.

Waiting for [CWG 1518] the workaround could be to move the assignment of `optional<T>` from a `nullopt_t` to a template as it was done for `T`.

## Differences between `nonesuch` and `none_t`

Even if both types contains the none word they are completely different. `std::experimental::nonesuch` is a bottom type with no instances and, `std::experimental::none_t` is a unit type with a single instance.

The intent of `nonesuch` is to represent a type that is not used at all, so that it can be used to mean not detected. `none_t` intent is to represent a type that is none of the other alternatives in the sum type. 

## `nullable::none_type_t` and `nullable::value_type_t`.

A *Nullable* can be considered as a sum type. It is always useful reflect the related types. `nullable::none_type_t` and `nullable::value_type_t` give respectively the associated non-a-value and the value types.

# Proposal

This paper proposes to

* add `none_t`/`none()`,
* add `none<TC>()`, `none<Tmpl>()`,
* add requirements for *Nullable* and *StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable* types, and derive the mixed comparison operations on them,
* add some minor changes to `optional`, `any` to be constructed from `none_t` and to customize the *Nullable* requirements.

# Impact on the standard

These changes are entirely based on library extensions and do not require any language features beyond what is available in C++14. There are however some classes in the standard that needs to be customized.

This paper depends in some way on the helper classes proposed in [P0343R1], as e.g. the place holder `_t` and the associated specialization for the type constructors `optional<_t>`, `unique_ptr<_t>`, `shared_ptr<_t>`.

# Proposed Wording

The proposed changes are expressed as edits to [N4617] the Working Draft - C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals V2.

**Add a "Nullable Objects" section**

## Nullable Objects

### No-value state indicator

The `std::experimental::none_t` is a user defined type that has a factory `std::experimental::none()`. The explicit default construction of `none_t{}` is equal to `none()`. `std::experimental::none_t` shall be a literal type. We say `none_t` is a unit type. 


[Note: `std::experimental::none_t` is a distinct unit type to indicate the state of not containing a value for *Nullable* objects. The single value of this type `none()` is a constant that can be converted to any *Nullable* type and that must equally compare to a default constructed *Nullable*. —- endnote]

### *Nullable* requirements

A *Nullable* type is a type that supports a distinctive null value. A type `N` meets the requirements of *Nullable* if:

* `N` satisfies the requirements of *EqualityComparable* *DefaultConstructible*, and *Destructible*,
* the expressions shown in the table below are valid and have the indicated semantics, and
* `N` satisfies all the other requirements of this sub-clause.

A value-initialized object of type `N` produces the null value of the type. The null value shall be equivalent only to itself. A default-initialized object of type `N` may have an indeterminate value. [ Note: Operations involving indeterminate values may cause undefined behavior. — end note ]

No operation which is part of the *Nullable* requirements shall exit via an exception.

In Table X below, `u` denotes an identifier, `t` denotes a non-const lvalue of type `N`, a and b denote values of type(possibly const) N, `x` denotes a (possibly const) expression of type `N`,
and `nN` denotes `std::experimental::none<N>()`
and `n` denotes `std::experimental::none()`.

<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="border-collapse: collapse" bordercolor="#111111" width="607">
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> <b>Expression</b> </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> <b>Return Type</b> </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> <b>Operational Semantics</b> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> nullable::none&lt;N>() </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> none_type_t&lt;N></td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> N{} </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> post: holds_alternative_value(N{}, nN)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> N u(n) </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> post: holds_alternative_value(u, nN)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> N u(nN) </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> post: holds_alternative_value(u, nN)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> N u = n </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> post: holds_alternative_value(u, nN)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> N u = nN </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> post: holds_alternative_value(u, nN)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> N(n) </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> post: holds_alternative_value(N(n), nN)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> N(nN) </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> post: holds_alternative_value(N(nN), nN)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> std::has_value(x) </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> contextually convertible to bool</td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> true if ! holds_alternative_value(x, nN)</td>
    </tr>

</table>

### *EqualityComparableNullable* requirements

A type `N` meets the requirements of * EqualityComparableNullable* if:

* `N` satisfies the requirements of *EqualityComparable* and *Nullable*.


<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="border-collapse: collapse" bordercolor="#111111" width="607">

    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> a != b </td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> contextually convertible to bool</td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> !(a == b) </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> a == np, np == a</td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> contextually convertible to bool</td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> holds_alternative_value(a, np)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> a != np , np != a</td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> contextually convertible to bool</td>
        <td align="left" valign="top"> ! holds_alternative_value(a, np)</td>
    </tr>

</table>

### *StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable* requirements

A type `N` meets the requirements of *StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable* if:

* `N` satisfies the requirements of *StrictWeaklyOrdered* and *Nullable*.



### Header <experimental/nullable> synopsis [nullable.synop]

```c++
namespace std {
namespace experimental {
inline namespace fundamentals_v3 {
namespace nullable {

    template <class N>
        constexpr bool has_value(N&& n) noexcept;
    template <class N, class T>
        constexpr bool holds_alternative_value(N&& n, T && v) noexcept;

    // class none_t 
    struct none_t;
    
    // none_t relational operators
    constexpr bool operator==(none_t, none_t) noexcept;
    constexpr bool operator!=(none_t, none_t) noexcept;
    constexpr bool operator<(none_t, none_t) noexcept;
    constexpr bool operator<=(none_t, none_t) noexcept;
    constexpr bool operator>(none_t, none_t) noexcept;
    constexpr bool operator>=(none_t, none_t) noexcept;
        
    // none_t factory
    constexpr none_t none() noexcept;
    
    // class traits
    template <class T, class Enabler=void>
        struct traits {};

    // class traits_pointer_like
    struct traits_pointer_like;

    // class traits specialization for pointers
    template <class T>
        struct traits<T*>;
 
    template <class T>
        constexpr auto none() -> `see below` noexcept;
        
    template <template <class ...> class TC>
        constexpr auto none() -> `see below` noexcept;

    template <class T>
        using none_type_t = decltype(nullable::none<T>());
                  
}

    using nullable::none_t;
    using nullable::none_type_t;
    using nullable::none;
    using nullable::has_value;
    using nullable::holds_alternative_value;
    
    template <class T>
        struct is_nullable;
    template <class T>
        struct is_nullable<const T> : is_nullable<T> {};
    template <class T>
        struct is_nullable<volatile T> : is_nullable<T> {};
    template <class T>
        struct is_nullable<const volatile T> : is_nullable<T> {};

    template <class T>
        constexpr bool is_nullable_v = is_nullable<T>::value ;

  template <class T>
    struct is_strict_weakly_ordered_nullable;

namespace nullable {
    // Comparison with none_t
    template < class C >
      bool operator==(none_t, C const& x) noexcept;
    template < class C >
      bool operator==(C const& x, none_t) noexcept;
    template < class C >
      bool operator!=(none_t, C const& x) noexcept;
    template < class C >
      bool operator!=(C const& x, none_t) noexcept;

    template < class C >
	   bool operator<(none_t, C const& x) noexcept;
    template < class C >
	   bool operator<(C const& x, none_t) noexcept;
    template < class C >
	   bool operator<=(none_t, C const& x) noexcept;
    template < class C >
	   bool operator<=(C const& x, none_t) noexcept;
    template < class C >
	   bool operator>(none_t, C const& x) noexcept;
    template < class C >
	   bool operator>(C const& x, none_t) noexcept;
    template < class C >
	   bool operator>=(none_t, C const& x) noexcept;
    template < class C >
	   bool operator>=(C const& x, none_t) noexcept;
	   
}}}}
```

### No-value state indicator [nullable.none_t]

The struct `none_t` is an empty structure type used as a unique type to indicate the state of not containing a value for *Nullable* objects. It shall be a literal type. 

```c++
namespace nullable {
    struct none_t{
        explicit none_t() = default;
        template <class T>
            operator T*() const noexcept { return nullptr; }
    };
}
```

### `none_t` relational operators [nullable.none_t.rel]

```c++
namespace nullable {
    constexpr bool operator==(none_t, none_t) noexcept { return true; }
    constexpr bool operator!=(none_t, none_t) noexcept { return false; }
    constexpr bool operator<(none_t, none_t) noexcept { return false; }
    constexpr bool operator<=(none_t, none_t) noexcept { return true; }
    constexpr bool operator>(none_t, none_t) noexcept { return false; }
    constexpr bool operator>=(none_t, none_t) noexcept { return true; }
}
```

[ Note: `none_t` objects have only a single state; they thus always compare equal. — end note ]

###  `none_t` factory [nullable.none_t.fact]

```c++
namespace nullable {
    constexpr none_t none() noexcept { return none_t{}; } 
}
```

###  class `traits` [nullable.traits]

```c++
namespace nullable {
    template <class T, class Enabler=void>
        struct traits {};

    // class traits_pointer_like
    struct traits_pointer_like
    {
        static constexpr
            nullptr_t none() noexcept { return nullptr; }
        template <class Ptr>
            static constexpr
            bool has_value(Ptr ptr) { return bool(ptr); }
        template <class Ptr, class T>
            static constexpr
            bool holds_alternative_value(Ptr ptr, T&& x) { 
                return has_value(ptr) && *ptr == x; 
            }
            
      template <class V, class T>
      static constexpr
      bool holds_alternative_value(V && v, T&& x) noexcept 
      { 
        if (!has_value(std::forward<V>(v))) return false; 
        using DT = devay_t<T>;
        if (auto* dt = get_if<DT>(&a))
        {
            return v == *dt;
        }
        return false;          
      }
            
    };

    // class traits specialization for pointers
    template <class T>
        struct traits<T*> 
            : traits_pointer_like<T*>
        {};
} 
```
###  Template function `has_value` [nullable.has_value]

```c++
namespace nullable {
    template <class N>
        constexpr bool has_value(N&& n) noexcept;
}
```

###  Template function `holds_alternative_value` [nullable.holds_alternative_value]

```c++
namespace nullable {
    template <class N, class T>
        constexpr bool holds_alternative_value(N&& n, T const& v) noexcept;
    template <class N, class T>
        constexpr bool holds_alternative_value(N && v, none_t) noexcept { 
            return ! has_value(std::forward<N>(n)); 
        }        
}
```

###  Template function `none` [nullable.none]

```c++
namespace nullable {
    template <class T>
        constexpr auto none() -> 
            decltype(nullable::traits<T>::none()) noexcept;
        
    template <template <class ...> class TC>
        constexpr auto none() ->
            decltype(none<type_constructor_t<meta::quote<TC>>>()) noexcept;
}
```


###  Template class `is_nullable` [nullable.is_nullable]

```c++
  
    template <class T>
        struct is_nullable;
    template <class T>
        struct is_nullable<const T> : is_nullable<T> {};
    template <class T>
        struct is_nullable<volatile T> : is_nullable<T> {};
    template <class T>
        struct is_nullable<const volatile T> : is_nullable<T> {};

    template <class T>
        constexpr bool is_nullable_v = is_nullable<T>::value ;

```

###  Template class `is_strict_weakly_ordered_nullable` [nullable.is_strict_weakly_ordered_nullable]

```c++
  template <class T>
    struct is_strict_weakly_ordered_nullable :    
        conjunction<is_strict_weakly_ordered<T>,  is_nullable<T>> {};
```

###  *Nullable* comparison with `none_t` [nullable.none_t_eq_ops]

```c++
namespace nullable {
    template < class C >
      bool operator==(none_t, C const& x) noexcept 
        { return ! ::std::has_value(x); }
    template < class C >
      bool operator==(C const& x, none_t) noexcept 
        { return ! ::std::has_value(x); }
    template < class C >
      bool operator!=(none_t, C const& x) noexcept  
        { return ::std::has_value(x); }
    template < class C >
      bool operator!=(C const& x, none_t) noexcept  
        { return ::std::has_value(x); }
```

*Remark*: The previous functions shall not participate in overload resolution unless `C` satisfies * Nullable*.

###  *StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable* comparison with `none_t` [nullable.none_t_ord_ops]

```c++

    template < class C >
	   bool operator<(none_t, C const& x) noexcept 
	       { return ::std::has_value(x); }
    template < class C >
	   bool operator<(C const& x, none_t) noexcept 
	       { return false; }
    template < class C >
	   bool operator<=(none_t, C const& x) noexcept 
	       { return true; }
    template < class C >
	   bool operator<=(C const& x, none_t) noexcept 
	       { return ! ::std::has_value(x); }
    template < class C >
	   bool operator>(none_t, C const& x) noexcept 
	       { return false; }
    template < class C >
	   bool operator>(C const& x, none_t) noexcept 
	       { return ::std::has_value(x); }
    template < class C >
	   bool operator>=(none_t, C const& x) noexcept 
	       { return ! ::std::has_value(x); }
    template < class C >
	   bool operator>=(C const& x, none_t) noexcept { return true; }
	   
}	   
```

*Remark*: The previous functions shall not participate in overload resolution unless `C` satisfies *StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable*.


## Optional Objects

**Add conversions from `none_t` in [optional.object]**.

```c++
template <class T> class optional {
// ...
// 20.6.3.1, constructors
constexpr optional(none_t) noexcept;

// 20.6.3.3, assignment
optional &operator=(none_t) noexcept;
};

``` 

**Update  [optional.object.ctor] adding before p 1**.

```c++
constexpr optional(none_t) noexcept;
```

**Update  [optional.object.assign] adding before p 1**.

```c++
optional<T>& operator=(none_t) noexcept;
```

**Add Specialization of *Nullable* [optional.object.nullable]**.

20.6.x Nullable

`optional<T>` is a model of *Nullable*.

```c++
namespace nullable {
    template <class T>
    struct traits<optional<T>> : traits_pointer_like{
      static constexpr
      nullopt_t none() noexcept { return nullopt; }
    };
}
```

    
## Class Any

**Add conversions from `none_t` in [any.object]**.

```c++
class any {
// ...
// 20.7.3.1, construction and destruction
constexpr any(none_t) noexcept;

// 20.7.3.2, assignments
any &operator=(none_t) noexcept;
};
```

**Update  [any.cons] adding before p 1**.

```c++
constexpr any(none_t) noexcept;
```

*Effects*: As if `reset()`

*Postcondition*: `this->has_value() == false`.

**Update  [any.assign] adding after p 12**.

```c++
any<T>& operator=(none_t) noexcept;
```

*Effects*: As if `reset()`

*Returns*: `*this`

*Postcondition*: `has_value() == false`.


**Add Specialization of *Nullable* [any.object.nullable]**.

20.6.x Nullable

`any` is a model of *Nullable*.


```c++
namespace nullable {
    template <>
    struct traits<any> {
      template <class A>
      static constexpr
      bool has_value(A && v) noexcept { return v.has_value(); }
      template <class A, class T>
      static constexpr
      bool holds_alternative_value(A && a, T&& x) noexcept { 
        if (!has_value(std::forward<A>(a))) return false; 
        using DT = devay_t<T>;
        if (auto* dt = any_cast<DT>(&a))
        {
            return x == *dt;
        }
        return false;          
      }
      
      static constexpr
      none_t none() noexcept { return none_t{}; }
    };
}
```

## Variant Objects

**Add Specialization of *Nullable* [any.object.nullable]**.

x.y.z Nullable

`variant<none_t, Ts...>` is a models of *Nullable*.

```c++
namespace nullable {
    template <class ...Ts>
    struct traits<variant<none_t, Ts...>> {
      static constexpr
      none_t none() noexcept { return none_t{}; }
      template <class V>
      static constexpr
      bool has_value(V && v) noexcept { return v.index()>0; }
      template <class V, class T>
      static constexpr
      bool holds_alternative_value(V && v, T&& x) noexcept 
      { 
        if (!has_value(std::forward<V>(v))) return false; 
        using DT = devay_t<T>;
        if (auto* dt = get_if<DT>(&a))
        {
            return v == *dt;
        }
        return false;          
      }
    };
}
```

## Smart Pointers

`unique_ptr<T, D>` is a models of *Nullable*.

```c++
namespace nullable {
    template <class T, class D>
    struct traits<unique_ptr<T, D> : traits_pointer_like {};
}
```

`shared_ptr<T>` is a models of *Nullable*.

```c++
namespace nullable {
    template <class T>
    struct traits<shared_ptr<T>> : traits_pointer_like {};
}
```

# Implementability

This proposal can be implemented as pure library extension, without any language support, in C++14.
However the adoption of [CWG 1518], [CWG 1630] makes it simpler.

# Open points

The authors would like to have an answer to the following points if there is any interest at all in this proposal:

* Should we include `none_t` in `<experimental/functional>` or in a specific file?
	* We believe that a specific file is a better choice as this is needed in `<experimental/optional>`, `<experimental/any>` and `<experimental/variant>`. We propose `<experimental/nullable>`.

* Should the mixed comparison with `none_t` be defined implicitly?

    * An alternative is to don't define them. In this case it could be better to remove the *Nullable* and *StrictWeaklyOrderedNullable* requirements as the "reason d'être" of those requirements is to define these operations.

* Should *Nullable* require in addition the expression `n = {}` to mean reset?

* Should `std::any` be considered as *Nullable*? Note that `std::any` is not *EqualityComparable*. Should we relax the *Nullable* requirements?

* Should we add `nullany_t` type as the `none_type_t<any>` to avoid ambiguities?.

* Should `variant<none_t, Ts ...>` be considered as *Nullable*?


# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Tony Van Eerd and Titus Winters for helping me to improve globally the paper. Thanks to Agustín Bergé K-ballo for his useful comments. Thanks to Ville Voutilainen for the pointers about explicit default construction.

Special thanks and recognition goes to Technical Center of Nokia - Lannion for supporting in part the production of this proposal.

# History

## Revision 5

* Don't require *EqualityComparable* as `std::any` is not *EqualityComparable* and instead of defining *Nullable* in function of equality `u == nN` we should define it in function of a specific function `holds_alternative_value(u, nN)`.
* **TODO** Add an alternative interface for the function using the customization point to use CPO, as the Range library [N4381].
 
## Revision 4

* Rollback the modifications of revision 3, as they belong to *ValueOrError* [P0786R0] kind of types. 
    * We should move `deref()` to `ValueOrNone`, as `std::any` cannot define it, as it has not a unique value. As consequence the functions added in the previous version `value_or` and `apply_or` should be moved as well.
    * The same applies to the added `visit` function. We cannot visit any *Nullable* as we don't know what are its possibly values. This function belongs to *ValueOrNone* and to *ValueOrError*. *ValueOrNone* is a *Nullable* that has only one possible value type. *ValueOrNone* is specialization of *ValueOrError* where the Error is a unit type.
    * Next follows the concept hierarchy:

        * *SuccessOrValue* (suceeded, sucess_value, failure_value) (examples result<T> => TRY
            * *ValueOrError*  (has_value, deref, error) (examples: expected, result => SumType, Functor, Applicative, Monad, MonadError
                * *ValueOrNone*  
        * *Nullable* (has_value, none) (examples std::variant<none_t, Ts...>, std::any)
            * *ValueOrNone* (deref) (examples T*, std::optional, std::unique_ptr, ...)  => ValueOrError 
                 
    * Move *Functor*, *Applicative*, *Monad*, *MonadError* specialization to *ValueOrError* [P0786R0].
     
## Revision 3

Added the following specific *Nullable* functions and types to see *Nullables* as *Functors*, *Applicatives*, *Monads* and *SumType*:

* Added customization point `nullable::deref`.
* Added `nullable::none_type_t` and `nullable::value_type_t`.
* Added `nullable::transform` (*Functor*), `nullable::ap`  (*Applicative*) and `nullable::bind` (*Monad*) [P0650R0] when the *Nullable* is also *TypeConstructible* [P0338R2].
* Added `nullable::visit` (sum_type) [SUM_TYPE].
* Added `nullable::value_or` and `nullable::apply_or`.
  
## Revision 2

Fixes some typos and take in account the feedback from Oulu meeting. Next follows the direction of the committee: 

* Add more examples in the documentation, including nesting of *Nullable*s.
* More explicit tests in the implementation.
* Pointers should be *Nullable*.
* `has_value` should be non-member.
* Added a before/after comparison table.

Unfortunately initializing the nested *Nullables* with a nested `none` is not  possible if the associated none-type are the same. This is in line with  `optional<optional<T>>`.

Other changes:

* Consider having `none_type<T>` traits derived from the `none<T>()` function.
* Consider adding `is_nullable` type trait and `nullable::tag`.
* `std::any` cannot be considered as *Nullable* as far as we request *EqualityComparable* as we do for *NullablePointer*.
* Add examples using Template argument deduction for constructors.
 
## Revision 1

The 1<sup>st</sup> revision of [P0196R0] fixes some typos and takes in account the feedback from Jacksonville meeting. Next follows the direction of the committee: the explicit approach `none<optional>` should be explored.

The approach taken by this revision is to provide both factories but instead of a literal we use a functions `none()` and `none<optional>()`.

## Revision 0

This takes in account the feedback from Kona meeting [P0032R0]. The direction of
the committee was:

* Do we want `none_t` to be a separate paper?

```
  SF F N A SA
  11 1 3 0 0
```

* Do we want the `operator bool` changes?
No, instead a `.something()` member function (e.g. `has_value`) is preferred for
the 3 classes. This doesn't mean yet that we replace the existing explicit
`operator bool` in `optional`.

* Do we want emptiness checking to be consistent between `any`/`optional`?
Unanimous yes

```
  Provide operator bool for both  Y:  6 N: 5
  Provide .something()            Y: 17 N: 0
  Provide =={}                    Y:  0 N: 5
  Provide ==std::none             Y:  5 N: 2
  something(any/optional)         Y:  3 N: 8
```

# References

[N4381]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4381.html "Suggested Design for Customization Points"

[N4617]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/n4617.pdf "N4617 - Working Draft, C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals, Version 2 DTS"

[P0032R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0032r0.pdf "Homogeneous interface for variant, any and optional"

[P0042R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0042r0.pdf "std::recover: undoing type erasure"

[P0050R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0050r0.pdf "C++ generic match function"

[P0088R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0088r0.pdf "Variant: a type-safe union that is rarely invalid (v5)"  

[P0091R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0091r0.html "Template parameter deduction for constructors (Rev. 3)"

[P0338R2]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2017/p0338r2.pdf "C++ generic factories"

[P0343R1]: http://www.open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/papers/2017/p0343r1.pdf "Meta-programming High-Order functions"

[P0650R0]: http://www.open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/papers/2017/p0650r0.pdf "C++ Monadic interface"  

[P0786R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2017/p0786r0.html "*ValuedOrError* and *ValueOrNone* types"

[LWG 2510]: http://cplusplus.github.io/LWG/lwg-active.html#2510 "Tag types should not be DefaultConstructible"
        
[CWG 1518]: http://open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/cwg_active.html#1518 "Explicit default constructors and copy-list-initialization" 
    
[CWG 1630]: http://open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/cwg_defects.html#1630 "Multiple default constructor templates" 

[SUM_TYPE]: https://github.com/viboes/std-make/tree/master/include/experimental/fundamental/v3/sum_type "Generic Sum Types"
    
* [N4381] Suggested Design for Customization Points

   http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4381.html

* [N4617] N4617 - Working Draft, C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals, Version 2 DTS

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/n4617.pdf

* [P0032R0] Homogeneous interface for variant, any and optional

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0032r0.pdf

* [P0042R0] std::recover: undoing type erasure 
 
    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0042r0.pdf

* [P0050R0] C++ generic match function

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0050r0.pdf

* [P0088R0] Variant: a type-safe union that is rarely invalid (v5)

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0088r0.pdf

* [P0091R0] Template parameter deduction for constructors (Rev. 3)

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0091r0.html
    
* [P0338R2] C++ generic factories

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2017/p0338r2.pdf

* [P0343R1] - Meta-programming High-Order functions

    http://www.open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/papers/2017/p0343r1.pdf

* [P0650R0] C++ Monadic interface

    http://www.open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/papers/2017/p0650r0.pdf

* [P0786R0] *ValuedOrError* and *ValueOrNone* types

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2017/p0786r0.html

* [LWG 2510] Tag types should not be DefaultConstructible

    http://cplusplus.github.io/LWG/lwg-active.html#2510
    
* [CWG 1518] Explicit default constructors and copy-list-initialization 

    http://open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/cwg_active.html#1518

* [CWG 1630] Multiple default constructor templates  

    http://open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/cwg_defects.html#1630

* [SUM_TYPE] Generic Sum Types

    https://github.com/viboes/std-make/tree/master/include/experimental/fundamental/v3/sum_type

