<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="border-collapse: collapse" bordercolor="#111111" width="607">
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Document number:</td>
        <td width="435"><span style="background-color: #FFFF00">DXXXXR0</span></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Date:</td>
        <td width="435">2016-01-16</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Project:</td>
        <td width="435">ISO/IEC JTC1 SC22 WG21 Programming Language C++</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Audience:</td>
        <td width="435">Evolution Working Group</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Reply-to:</td>
        <td width="435">Vicente J. Botet Escriba &lt;<a href="mailto:vicente.botet@wanadoo.fr">vicente.botet@wanadoo.fr</a>&gt;</td>
    </tr>
</table>

# Default Hash 
==============

**Abstract**

Defining `hash_value` or specializing `is_uniquely_represented` as defined in [P0029R0] for simple classes is tedious, repetitive, slightly error-prone, and easily automated. 

I propose to (implicitly) supply default versions of this operation, if needed.  The meaning of `hash_value` is to combine the members using `hash_combine`. 

# Table of Contents

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Motivation](#motivation)
3. [Proposal](#proposal)
4. [Design Rationale](#design-rationale)
5. [Alternative solutions](#alternative-solutions)
6. [Implementability](#implementability)
7. [Open points](#open-points)
8. [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)
9. [References](#references)

# Introduction

Defining `hash_value` or specializing `is_uniquely_represented` as defined in [P0029R0] for simple classes is tedious, repetitive, slightly error-prone, and easily automated. 

I propose to (implicitly) supply default versions of this operation, if needed.  The meaning of `hash_value` is to combine the members using `hash_combine`. 

If the simple defaults are unsuitable for a class, a programmer can, as ever, define more suitable ones or suppress the defaults. The proposal is to add the operations as an integral part of C++ (like =), rather than as a library feature. 

The proposal follows the same approach as Default comparison as in [N4475], that is, that having default generated code for these basic operations only when needed and possible would make the language simpler. 

This paper contains no proposed wording. This is a discussion paper to determine EWG interest in the feature, and if there is interest to get direction for a follow-up paper with wording.

# Motivation

Some standard algorithms require that an argument type supply a valid `hash` instantiation. Writing such types can be tedious (and all tedious tasks are error prone).

For example

```c++
class Foo {
  int i;
  string str;
  bool b;
  //...
  friend bool operator==(const Foo& lhs, const Foo& rhs) {
    return lhs.i == rhs.i && lhs.str == rhs.str && lhs.b == rhs.b;
  }

  template <class H>
  friend H hash_value(H h, const Foo& foo) {
    return hash_combine(std::move(h), foo.i, foo.str, foo.b);
  }
};
```

If Default comparison [N4475] is adopted, the `==` operator will be not needed anymore as it could be generated by default as `=` operator is already.

# Proposal

I propose to generate default versions for `hash_value` for simple classes when needed. If those defaults are unsuitable for a type, `=delete` them. If non-default of those operations are needed, define them (as always). If an operation is already declared, a default is not generated for it. This is exactly the way assignment and constructors work today and as comparison operators would work is [N4475] is adopted.

Note that if `==` operator is defined by the user,  `has_value` default generation couldn't reflect the user decisions, and so it seems reasonable to don't provide such a generation. 

The same rationale given in [N4475] applies `hash_value`. 


This paper uses the last hash proposal [P0029R0] as it pretends to unify previous proposals as [N3980]. This paper should be adapted to the final proposal. For the time being, we will use [P0029R0].

It could also be great if the `hash_value` function could be generated by the compiler following the philosophy and criteria as defined in [N4475].

## What about `is_uniquely_represented`?

When `==` operator is generated by the compiler, it is not difficult to specialize `is_uniquely_represented` when the type of the concerned members (those used to define `==`operator), let call them `Ti` satisfy `is_uniquely_represented<Ti>` and there are no other data members nor padding.

Here it is how it could be specialized for `std::pair`.

```c++
template <class T, class U>
struct is_uniquely_represented<std::pair<T, U>>
    : public std::bool_constant<is_uniquely_represented<T>::value &&
                                is_uniquely_represented<U>::value &&
                                sizeof(T) + sizeof(U) == sizeof(std::pair<T, U>)>
{
};
```

If `is_uniquely_represented<C>{}==true`, there is no need to overload `hash_value` as `hash_value` is already defined for those types.

## When `is_uniquely_represented` could specialized?

There would be no need to specialize it when the result will be false. However we must do it for templates as we don't know at compile time the result. So the specialization will be always generated.

In addition to the common restrictions defined above, the following restricts the generation of `is_uniquely_represented` specialization

* `is_uniquely_represented` has been already specialized before the first need for `is_uniquely_represented`, or
* the `==` operator is user defined or cannot be generated,

[Note: If the there is a specialization of `is_uniquely_represented` after its first need or in another translation unit, the program would be already ill-formed as there is a violation of the ODR. -- end]

## What is the definition of `hash_value`?

The natural definition which combines, using `hash_combine`, each one of the data members seam to be a good candidate for the default. 

## When `hash_value` could be applied?

The following restricts the generation of `has_value` for a class C

* has that operation defined or deleted before the first need for `hash_value` or
* the `==` operator is user defined or cannot be generated, or
* `is_uniquely_represented<C>{}==true`, or
* has a user-defined or deleted copy or move operation, or
* has a virtual base, or
* has a virtual function, or
* has a pointer member.
 
The generated implementation for `hash_value` is not considered a function so it cannot have its address taken [Note: like the default `=` operator].

Mutable members are ignored for the generated implementations.

[Note: If the overload of `hash_value` appears after its first need or in another translation unit, the program would be already ill-formed as there is a violation of the ODR. -- end]

[Note: Identifying this violation would require link-time checking. -- end].

# Design Rationale

## Why to require that the default generation of `operator==` is applied?

The members use in the default generation for `hash_value` or the specialization of `is_uniquely_represented`  must be the same than the ones that are taken in account for the definition of the `==` operator. When the user defines the `==` operator, there is no evident way to ensure this constrain. This is why the default generation for `hash_value` and `is_uniquely_represented` is applied only when the generation of `==` is also applied.


# Alternative solutions

Based on a future reflection library e.g. [N4428] or [N4451], we could define the `hash_value` function instead of generating it.  

# Implementability

This proposal needs some compiler magic, either by generating directly the `hash_value` function or by providing the reflection traits as e.g. in [N4428] or [N4451].

Next follows un incomplete implementation

```c++
namespace std {
namespace experimental {namespace reflect { inline namespace v1 {

    template <class C>
    struct is_hash_value_generation_enabled;

}}}

template <class H, class C, class Enabler=enable_if<reflect::is_hash_value_generation_enabled<C>{}) >
H hash_value(H h, C & x) 
{
    // hash_combine the non-static non-mutable data-member
    return hash_combine(h, ...)
}

} // namespace std

```


# Open Questions

* Do we want a default or a reflection solution?

# Summary

Defaulting `hash_value` operation is simple, removes a common annoyance. It is completely compatible. In particular, the existing facilities for defining and suppressing those operations are untouched.


# Acknowledgments

Thanks to Bjarne Strustrup for its clear identification of the types that are subject to this kind of default generation in [N4475]. Many thanks to Howard Hinnant, his comments in the ML, that allowed me to  better understand how the user customization must be used and think about adding `is_uniquely_represented` specialization was introduced. 

Thanks to all those that have commented the idea on the std-standard ML helping to better identify the constraints and improve the proposal in general. 

# References

[N3980]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2014/n3980.html "Types Don't Know #"

[N4428]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4428.pdf "Type Property Queries (rev 4)"

[N4451]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4451.pdf "Static reflection"

[N4475]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4475.pdf "Default comparisons (R2)"

[P0017R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0017r0.html "Extension to aggregate initialization"

[P0029R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0029r0.html "A Unified Proposal for Composable Hashing"


* [N3980] Types Don't Know #

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2014/n3980.html

* [N4428] Type Property Queries (rev 4)

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4428.pdf

* [N4451] Static reflection
 
    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4451.pdf

* [N4475] Default comparisons (R2)

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4475.pdf

* [P0017R0] Extension to aggregate initialization

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0017r0.html

* [P0029R0] A Unified Proposal for Composable Hashing

	http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0029r0.html

