**____________________________________ DRAFT ___________________________________**

<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" style="border-collapse: collapse" bordercolor="#111111" width="607">
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Document number:</td>
        <td width="435"><span style="background-color: #FFFF00">D0327R0</span></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Date:</td>
        <td width="435">2016-05-27</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Project:</td>
        <td width="435">ISO/IEC JTC1 SC22 WG21 Programming Language C++</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Audience:</td>
        <td width="435"> Evolution Working Group / Reflection Working Group / Library Evolution Working Group </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="172" align="left" valign="top">Reply-to:</td>
        <td width="435">Vicente J. Botet Escrib&aacute; &lt;<a href="mailto:vicente.botet@wanadoo.fr">vicente.botet@nokia.com</a>&gt;</td>
    </tr>
</table>


Product types access
====================

# Abstract

This paper proposes a library mechanism for deconstructing types that parallels the language mechanism described in Structured binding [P0326R0]. This proposal name them *product types* The interface includes getting the number of elements, access to the n<sup>th</sup> element and the type of the n<sup>th</sup> element.

The main benefits of this are cheap reflection, allow automatic serialization support, automated interfaces, etc.

The wording depends on the wording of [P0326R0].

In addition, some of the algorithms that work for *tuple-like* access are adapted to work with *product types*. 

# Table of Contents

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Motivation](#motivation)
3. [Proposal](#proposal)
4. [Design Rationale](#design-rationale)
5. [Wording](#wording)
6. [Implementability](#implementability)
7. [Open points](#open-points)
8. [Future work](#future-work)
9. [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)
10. [References](#references)


# Introduction

Defining *tuple-like* access `tuple_size`, `tuple_element` and `get<I>/get<T>` for simple classes is -- as for comparison operators ([N4475]) -- tedious, repetitive, slightly error-prone, and easily automated.

[P0144R2]/[P0217R1]/[P0326R0] proposes the ability to bind all the members of some type, at a time via the new structured binding statement. This proposal names those types *product types*.

[P0197R0] proposed the generation of the *tuple-like* access function for simple structs as the [P0144R2] does for simple structs (case 3).

We are unable to define a *tuple-like* access interface for C-arrays, as the `get<I>(arr)` cannot be found by ADL.

This paper proposes a library interface to access the same types covered by Structured binding [P0326R0], *product types*.  The interface includes getting the number of elements, access to the n<sup>th</sup> element and the type of the n<sup>th</sup> element. This interface doesn't use ADL.

The wording of Structured binding has been modified so that both structured binding and the possible product type access wording isn't repetative. 


# Motivation

## Status-quo

Besides `std::pair`, `std::tuple` and `std::array`, aggregates in particular are good candidates to be considered as *tuple-like* types. However defining the *tuple-like* access functions is tedious, repetitive, slightly error-prone, and easily automated.

Some libraries, in particular [Boost.Fusion] and [Boost.Hana] provide some macros to generate the needed reflection instantiations. Once this reflection is available for a type, the user can use the struct in  algorithms working with heterogeneous sequences. Very often, when macros are used for something, it is hiding a language feature.

Algorithms such as `std::tuple_cat` and `std::experimental::apply` that work well with *tuple-like* types, should work also for *product* types. There are many more of them; a lot of the homogeneous container algorithm are applicable to heterogeneous containers and functions, see [Boost.Fusion] and [Boost.Hana]. Some examples of such algorithms are  `fold`, `accumulate`, `for_each` `any_of`,  `all_of`, `none_of`, `find`, `count`, `filter`, `transform`, `replace`, `join`, `zip`, `flatten`.

[P0144R2]/[P0217R1]/[P0326R0] proposes the ability to bind all the members of a *tuple-like* type at a time via the new structured binding statement. [P0197R0] proposes the generation of the *tuple-like* access function for simple structs as the [P0144R2] does for simple structs (case 3 in [P0144R2]).
 
The wording in [P0217R1]/[P0326R0], allows to do structure binding for C-arrays and allow bitfields as members in case 3 (built-in). But 

* bitfields cannot be managed by the current *tuple-like* access function `get<I>(t)` without returning a bitfields reference wrapper, so [P0197R0] doesn't provides a *tuple-like* access for all the types supported by [P0217R1]. 

* we are unable to find a `get<I>(arr)` overload on C-arrays using ADL.
 
This is unfortunately asymmetric. We want to have structure binding, pattern matching and *product types* access for the same types.

This means that the *extended tuple-like* access cannot be limited to *tuple-like* access. 

### Ability to work with bitfields

To provide *extended tuple-like* access for all the types covered by [P0144R2] which support getting the size and the n<sup>th</sup> element, we would need to define some kind of predefined operators `pt_size(T)`/`pt_get(N, pt)` that could use the new *product type* customization points. The use of operators, as opposed to pure library functions, is particularly required to support bitfield members. 

The authors don't know how to define a function interface that could manage with bitfield references. See [P0326R0] "Ability to work with bitfields only partially" for a description of the customization issues. 

#### Parameter packs

We shouldn't forget parameter packs, which could be seen as being similar to product types. Parameter packs already have the `sizeof...(T)` operator. Some (see e.g. [P0311R0] and references therein) are proposing to have a way to explicitly access the n<sup>th</sup> element of a pack (a variety of possible syntaxes have been suggested). The authors believe that the same operators should apply to parameter packs and product types.

# Proposal

Taking into consideration these points, this paper proposes a *product type* access library interface.

## Future *Product type* operator proposal (Not yet)

We don't propose yet the *product type* operators to get the size and the n<sup>th</sup> element as we don't have a good proposal for the operators's name. We prefer to wait until we have some concrete proposal for parameter packs direct access.

The *product type* access could be based on two operators: one `pt_size(T)` to get the size and the other `pt_get(N, pt)` to get the `N`<sup>th</sup> element of a *product type* instance `pt` of type `T`. The definition of these operators would be based on the wording of structured binding [P0217R1].

The name of the operators `pt_size` and `pt_get` are of course subject to bike-shedding.

But what would be the result type of those operators? While we can consider `pt_size` as a function and we could say that it returns an `unsigned int`, `pt_get(N,pt)` wouldn't be a function (if we want to support bitfields), and so `decltype(pt_get(N,pt))` wouldn't be defined if the N<sup>th</sup> element is a bitfield managed on [P0144R2] case 3. In all the other cases we can define it depending on the const-rvalue nature of `pt`.

The following could be syntactic sugar for those operators but we don't propose them yet. We wait to see what we do with parameter packs direct access and sum types.

* `pt_size(PT)` = `sizeof...(PT)`
* `pt_get(N, pt)` = `pt.[N]`

### Caveats

1. `pt_size(T)`, `pt_size(T)` and `pt_get(N, pt)` aren't functions, and so they cannot be used in any algorithm expecting a function. Generic algorithms working on *product* types should take the type as a template parameter and possibly an integral constant for the indices.

2. We need to find the name for those two operators.

## Product type library proposal

An alternative is to define generic functions `std::product_type::size<PT>()` and `std::product_type::get<I>(pt)` using wording similar to that in [P0217R1].

We have two possibilities for `std::product_type::get`: either it supports bitfield elements and we need a `std::bitfield_ref` type, or it doesn't supports them.

We believe that we should provide a `bitfield_ref` class in the future, but this is out of the scope of this paper.

However, we can already define the functions that will work well with all the *product types* expect for bitfields.

```c++
namespace std {
namespace product_type {

    template <class PT>
    struct size;

    // Wouldn't work for bitfields
    template <size_t N, class PT>
    constexpr auto get(PT&& pt)

    template <size_t N, class PT>
    struct element;

}}
```

While this could be seen as a limitation, and it would be in some cases, we can already start to define a lot of algorithms.

Users could already define their own `bitfield_ref` class and define its customization point for bitfields members if needed. 

## Algorithms and function adaptation

### <tuple>

#### `std::tuple_cat`

**Adapt the definition of `std::tuple_cat` in [tuple.creation] to take care of product type**

#### Constructor from a product type with the same number of elements as the tuple

Similar to the constructor from `pair`.

#### `std::apply`

**Adapt the definition of `std::apply` in [xxx] to take care of product type**

**NOTE: This algorithm could be moved to a *product type* specific algorithms file**. 

### <utility> `std::pair`

#### piecewise constructor

The following constructor could also be generalized to *product types*

```c++
template <class... Args1, class... Args2>
    pair(piecewise_construct_t,
        tuple<Args1...> first_args, tuple<Args2...> second_args);
```

```c++
template <class PT1, class PT2>
    pair(piecewise_construct_t, PT1 first_args, PT2 second_args);
```

#### Constructor and assignment from a product type with two elements

Similar to the `tuple` constructor from `pair`.

# Design Rationale

## What do we loss if we don't add this *product type* access in C++17?

We will be unable to define algorithms working on the same kind of types supported by Structured binding [P0326R0].

While Structured binding is a good tool for the user, it is not adapted to the library authors, as we need to know the number of elements of a product type to do Structured binding. 

This means that the user would continue to write generic algorithms based on the *tuple-like* access and we cannot have a *tuple-like* access for c-arrays and for the types covered by Structured binding case 3 [P0326R0].

## Traits versus functions

Should the *product type* `size` access be a constexpr function or a trait?

## Locating the interface on a specific namespace

The name of  *product type* interface, `size`, `get`, `element`, are quite common. Nesting them on a specific namespace makes the intent explicit. 

We can also preface them with `product_type_`, but the role of namespaces was to be able to avoid this kind of prefixes.

## Namespace versus struct

We can also place the interface nested on a struct. Using a namespace has the advantage that we can use using directives and using declarations.

Using a `struct` would make the interface closed to adding new nested functions, but it would be open by derivation.

# Wording

**Add a new `<product_type>` file in 17.6.1.2 Headers [headers] Table 14**

**Add the following section**

## Product type object

**Add the following Product type section**

**Product types terms**

A type `E` is a *product type* if the following terms are well defined.

*product type size*

* If `E` is an array type with element type `T`, equal to the number of elements of `E`.
* Else, if the expression `e.product_type_size()` is a well-formed integral constant expression, equal to `e.product_type_size()`.
* Else, if all of `E`'s non-static data members and bit-fields shall be public direct members of `E` or of the same unambiguous public base class of `E`, `E` shall not have an anonymous union member, equal to the number of non-static data members of `E`. 
* Else it is undefined.

*product type i <sup>th</sup>-element* 

* If the *product type size* of `E` is defined and `i` is less than the *product type size* of `E`.
    * If `E` is an array type with element type `T`, equal to `e[i]`.
    * Else, if the expression `e.product_type_size()` is a well-formed integral constant expression, equal to the following: The unqualified-id `product_type_get` is looked up in the scope of `E` by class member access lookup (3.4.5 [basic.lookup.classref]), and if that finds at least one declaration, the value is `e.product_type_get<i-1>()`. Otherwise, the value is `product_type_get<i-1>(e)`, where `product_type_get` is looked up in the associated namespaces (3.4.2 [basic.lookup.argdep]). [ Note: Ordinary unqualified lookup (3.4.1 [basic.lookup.unqual]) is not performed. -- end note ].
    * else, if all of `E`'s non-static data members and bit-fields shall be public direct members of `E` or of the same unambiguous public base class of `E`, `E` shall not have an anonymous union member, equal to  `e.mi` where `i`-th non-static data member of `E` in declaration order is designated by `mi`. 
    * Else it is undefined.
* Else it is undefined.



### Product type synopsis

```c++
namespace std {
namespace product_type {
   
    template <class PT>
    struct size;

    template <size_t N, class PT>
    constexpr auto get(PT&& pt);

    template <size_t I, class PT>
    struct element;

}}
```

### Template Function `product_type::size`


```c++
template <class PT>
constexpr size_t size();
```

*Effect*: As if `return` *product type size* `PT`.

*Remark*: This operation would not be defined if *product type size* `PT` is undefined.

### Template Class `product_type::size`

```c++
template <class PT>
struct size : integral_constant<size_t, *product type size* `PT`> {};
```

*Remark*: This trait would not be defined if *product type size* `PT` is undefined.

*Note*: In order to implement this trait library it would be required that the compiler provides some builtin as e.g. `__builtin_pt_size(PT)` that implements *product type size* `PT`.

### Template Function `product_type::get`

```c++
template <size_t N, class PT>
constexpr auto get(PT && pt);
```

*Requires*: `N < size<PT>()`

*Returns*: the *product type Nth-element* of `pt`.

*Remark*: This operation would not be defined if *product type Nth-element* of `pt` is undefined.

*Note*: In order to implement this function library it would be required that the compiler provides some builtin as e.g. `__builtin_pt_get(N, pt)` that implements *product type Nth-element* of `pt`.

### Template Class `product_type::element`

```c++
template <size_t N, class PT>
struct element { 
    using type = remove_reference_t<decltype(product_type::get<N>(declval<PT>()))>
};
```

*Remark*: This trait would not be defined if `product_type::get<N>(declval<PT>())` is undefined.

## <tuple>

### `std::tuple_cat`

**Adapt the definition of `std::tuple_cat` in [tuple.creation] to take care of product type**

*Replace `Tuples` by `PTs`, `tpls` by `pts`, `tuple` by `product type`, get by `product_type::get` and `tuple_size` by `product_type::size`*. 


```c++
template <class... PTs>
constexpr tuple<CTypes...> tuple_cat(PTs&&... pts);
```

### Constructor from a product type with the same number of elements as the tuple

```c++
template <class PT> EXPLICIT constexpr tuple(PT&& u); 
```
Let `Ui` is `product_type::element<i, PT>::type`.

*Effects*: For all `i`, the constructor initializes the `i`th element of `*this` with `std::forward<Ui>(product_type::get<i>(u))`.

*Remarks*: This function shall not participate in overload resolution unless `PT` is a product type with the same number elements than this tuple and `is_constructible<Ti, Ui&&>::value` is true for all `i`. The constructor is explicit if and only if `is_convertible<Ui&&, Ti>::value` is false for at least one `i`.

```c++
template <class PT>
  tuple& operator=(const PT& u);
```

*Remarks*: This function shall not participate in overload resolution unless `PT` is a product type with the same number elements than this tuple and `is_assignable<Ti&, const Ui&>::value` is true for all `i`.

*Effects*: Assigns each element `std::forward<Ui>(product_type::get<i>(u))` of `u` to the corresponding element of *this. 

*Returns*: `*this`

### `std::apply`

**Adapt the definition of `std::apply` in [xxx] to take care of product type**

*Replace `Tuple` by `PT`, `t` by `pt`, `tuple` by `product type`, `std::get` by `product_type::get` and `std::tuple_size` by `product_type::size`*. 

```c++
template <class F, class PT>
constexpr decltype(auto) apply(F&& f, PT&& t);
```

## `std::pair 

### piecewise constructor

**Replace**

```c++
template <class... Args1, class... Args2>
    pair(piecewise_construct_t,
        tuple<Args1...> first_args, tuple<Args2...> second_args);
```

**by**

```c++
template <class PT1, class PT2>
    pair(piecewise_construct_t, PT1 first_args, PT2 second_args);
```


### Constructor and assignment from a product type with two elements

```c++
template <class PT> EXPLICIT constexpr pair(PT&& u); 
```

Let where `Ui` is `product_type::element<i, PT>::type`.

*Effects*: For all `i`, the constructor initializes the `i`th element of `*this` with `std::forward<Ui>(product_type::get<i>(u)).

*Remarks*: This function shall not participate in overload resolution unless `PT` is a product type with 2 elements and `is_constructible<Ti, Ui&&>::value` is true for all `i`  The constructor is explicit if and only if `is_convertible<Ui&&, Ti>::value` is false for at least one `i`.

```c++
template <class PT>
  tuple& operator=(const PT& u);
```

Let where `Ui` is `product_type::element<i, PT>::type`.

*Effects*: Assigns each element `product_type::get<i>(u)` of `u` to the corresponding element of `*this`. 

*Returns*: `*this`

*Remarks*: This function shall not participate in overload resolution unless `PT` is a product type with 2 elements and`is_assignable<Ti&, const Ui&>::value` is true for all `i`.

             
# Implementability

This is not just a library proposal as the behavior depends on Structured binding [P0326R0]. There is no implementation as of the date of the whole proposal paper, however there is an implementation for the part that doesn't depend on the core language [PT_impl] emulating the cases 1 and 2.

# Open Questions

The authors would like to have an answer to the following points if there is any interest at all in this proposal:

* Do we want the `pt_size`/`pt_get` operators?
* Do we want the `std::product_type::size`/`std::product_type::get` functions?
* Do we want the `std::product_type::size`/`std::product_type::element` traits?
* Do we want to adapt `std::tuple_cat`
* Do we want to adapt `std::apply`
* Do we want the new constructors for `std::pair` and `std::tuple`

# Future work

## Add `bitfield_ref` class and allow product type function access to bitfield fields

## Add other *Product Type* algorithms

### `product_type::front`

`PT(T) -> T`

### `product_type::back`

`PT(T) -> T`

### `product_type::is_empty`

`PT(T) -> bool`

### `product_type::lexicographical_compare`

## Add other *TypeConstructible Product Type* algorithms

The following algorithms needs the `make<TC>(args...)` to work [factories].
If the first product type argument is *TypeConstructible* from the `CTypes` then return an instance of it, else construct a `std::tuple`. 

### `product_type::cat`

`TCPT(T)... -> TCPT(T)`
`PT(T)... -> tuple(T)`

### `product_type::drop_front`

`TCPT(T) -> TCPT(T)`
`PT(T) -> tuple(T)`

### `product_type::drop_back`

`TCPT(T) -> TCPT(T)`
`PT(T) -> tuple(T)`

### `product_type::group`

`TCPT(T) -> TCPT(TCPT(T))`
`PT(T) -> tuple(tuple(T))`

### `product_type::insert`

`TCPT(T) x unsigned x T -> TCPT(T)`

### ...



# Acknowledgments

Thanks to Jens Maurer, Matthew Woehlke and Tony Van Eerd for their comments in private discussion about structured binding and product types.

Thanks to all those that have commented the idea of a tuple-like generation on the std-proposals ML better helping to identify the constraints, in particular to J. "Nicol Bolas" McKesson, Matthew Woehlke and Tim "T.C." Song.

Thanks to David Sankel for revising the last version carefully.

# References


[Boost.Fusion]: http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_60_0/libs/fusion/doc/html/index.html "Boost.Fusion 2.2 library"

[Boost.Hana]: http://boostorg.github.io/hana/index.html "Boost.Hana library"

[N4381]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4381.html "Suggested Design for Customization Points"
   
[N4387]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4387.html "Improving pair and tuple, revision 3"

[N4475]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4475.pdf "Default comparisons (R2)"

[N4527]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4527.pdf "Working Draft, Standard for Programming Language C++"

[N4532]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4532.html "Proposed wording for default comparisons"

[N4564]: http://open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/papers/2015/n4564.pdf "Programming Languages — C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals, Version 2 PDTS"

[P0017R1]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0017r1.html "Extension to aggregate initialization"

[P0091R1]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0091r1.html "Template argument deduction for class templates (Rev. 4)"

[P0144R2]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0144r2.pdf "Structured Bindings"

[P0151R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0151r0.pdf "Proposal of Multi-Declarators"

[P0197R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0197r0.pdf "Default Tuple-like Access"

[P0217R1]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0217r1.html "Proposed wording for structured bindings"   

[P0311R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0311r0.html

[P0326R0]: http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0326r0.pdf "Structured binding: alternative design for customization points"  

[DSPM]: http://davidsankel.com/uncategorized/c-language-support-for-pattern-matching-and-variants "C++ Language Support for Pattern Matching and Variants"

[PT_impl]: https://github.com/viboes/std-make/blob/master/doc/proposal/reflection/product_type.cpp  " Product types access emmulation."
       

* [Boost.Fusion] Boost.Fusion 2.2 library

    http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_60_0/libs/fusion/doc/html/index.html

* [Boost.Hana] Boost.Hana library

    http://boostorg.github.io/hana/index.html

* [N4381] Suggested Design for Customization Points

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4381.html

* [N4387] Improving pair and tuple, revision 3

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4387.html

* [N4475] Default comparisons (R2)

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4475.pdf

* [N4527] Working Draft, Standard for Programming Language C++

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4527.pdf

* [N4532] Proposed wording for default comparisons

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/n4532.html

* [N4564] - Programming Languages — C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals, Version 2 PDTS

    http://open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/papers/2015/n4564.pdf
 
* [P0017R1] Extension to aggregate initialization

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0017r1.html

* [P0091R1] - Template argument deduction for class templates (Rev. 4)

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0091r1.html

* [P0144R2] Structured Bindings

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0144r2.pdf

* [P0151R0] Proposal of Multi-Declarators

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0151r0.pdf

* [P0197R0] Default Tuple-like Access

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2015/p0197r0.pdf

* [P0217R1] Proposed wording for structured bindings

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0217r1.html

* [P0311R0] A Unified Vision for Manipulating Tuple-like Objects

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0311r0.html

* [P0326R0] Structured binding: alternative design for customization points

    http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2016/p0326r0.pdf 

* [DSPM] C++ Language Support for Pattern Matching and Variants

    http://davidsankel.com/uncategorized/c-language-support-for-pattern-matching-and-variants 

* [PT_impl] Product types

    https://github.com/viboes/std-make/blob/master/doc/proposal/reflection/product_type.cpp 

